PART ONE



The boy's name wasSantiago . Dusk was falling as the boy arrived with his herd at an abandoned
church. The roof had fallen in long ago, and an enormous sycamore had grown on the spot where the
sacristy had once stood.

He decided to spend the night there. He saw to it that all the sheep entered through the ruined gate, and
then laid some planks across it to prevent the flock from wandering away during the night. There were no
wolves in the region, but once an animal had strayed during the night, and the boy had had to spend the
entire next day searching for it.

He swept the floor with his jacket and lay down, using the book he had just finished reading as a pillow.
He told himself that he would have to start reading thicker books: they lasted longer, and made more
comfortable pillows.

It was still dark when he awoke, and, looking up, he could see the stars through the half-destroyed roof.

I wanted to sleep a little longer, he thought. He had had the same dream that night as a week ago, and
once again he had awakened before it ended.

He arose and, taking up his crook, began to awaken the sheep that still slept. He had noticed that, as
soon as he awoke, most of his animals also began to stir. It was as if some mysterious energy bound his
life to that of the sheep, with whom he had spent the past two years, leading them through the countryside
in search of food and water. "They are so used to me that they know my schedule," he muttered.
Thinking about that for a moment, he realized that it could be the other way around: that it was he who
had become accustomed to their schedule.

But there were certain of them who took a bit longer to awaken. The boy prodded them, one by one,
with his crook, calling each by name. He had always believed that the sheep were able to understand
what he said. So there were times when he read them parts of his books that had made an impression on
him, or when he would tell them of the loneliness or the happiness of a shepherd in the fields. Sometimes
he would comment to them on the things he had seen in the villages they passed.



But for the past few days he had spoken to them about only one thing: the girl, the daughter of a
merchant who lived in the village they would reach in about four days. He had been to the village only
once, the year before. The merchant was the proprietor of a dry goods shop, and he always demanded
that the sheep be sheared in his presence, so that he would not be cheated. A friend had told the boy
about the shop, and he had taken his sheep there.



"I need to sell some wool," the boy told the merchant.

The shop was busy, and the man asked the shepherd to wait until the afternoon. So the boy sat on the
steps of the shop and took a book from his bag.

"I didn't know shepherds knew how to read," said a girl's voice behind him.

The girl was typical of the region of Andalusia , with flowing black hair, and eyes that vaguely recalled the
Moorish conquerors.

"Well, usually I learn more from my sheep than from books," he answered. During the two hours that
they talked, she told him she was the merchant's daughter, and spoke of life in the village, where each
day was like all the others. The shepherd told her of the Andalusian countryside, and related the news
from the other towns where he had stopped. It was a pleasant change from talking to his sheep.

"How did you learn to read?" the girl asked at one point.

"Like everybody learns," he said. "In school."

"Well, if you know how to read, why are you just a shepherd?"

The boy mumbled an answer that allowed him to avoid responding to her question. He was sure the girl
would never understand. He went on telling stories about his travels, and her bright, Moorish eyes went
wide with fear and surprise. As the time passed, the boy found himself wishing that the day would never
end, that her father would stay busy and keep him waiting for three days. He recognized that he was
feeling something he had never experienced before: the desire to live in one place forever. With the girl
with the raven hair, his days would never be the same again.

But finally the merchant appeared, and asked the boy to shear four sheep. He paid for the wool and
asked the shepherd to come back the following year.



And now it was only four days before he would be back in that same village. He was excited, and at the
same time uneasy: maybe the girl had already forgotten him. Lots of shepherds passed through, selling
their wool.

"It doesn't matter," he said to his sheep. "I know other girls in other places."

But in his heart he knew that it did matter. And he knew that shepherds, like seamen and like traveling
salesmen, always found a town where there was someone who could make them forget the joys of
carefree wandering.



The day was dawning, and the shepherd urged his sheep in the direction of the sun. They never have to
make any decisions, he thought. Maybe that's why they always stay close to me.

The only things that concerned the sheep were food and water. As long as the boy knew how to find the
best pastures inAndalusia , they would be his friends. Yes, their days were all the same, with the
seemingly endless hours between sunrise and dusk; and they had never read a book in their young lives,
and didn't understand when the boy told them about the sights of the cities. They were content with just
food and water, and, in exchange, they generously gave of their wool, their company, and — once in a
while — their meat.

If I became a monster today, and decided to kill them, one by one, they would become aware only after
most of the flock had been slaughtered, thought the boy. They trust me, and they've forgotten how to rely
on their own instincts, because I lead them to nourishment.

The boy was surprised at his thoughts. Maybe the church, with the sycamore growing from within, had
been haunted. It had caused him to have the same dream for a second time, and it was causing him to
feel anger toward his faithful companions. He drank a bit from the wine that remained from his dinner of
the night before, and he gathered his jacket closer to his body. He knew that a few hours from now, with
the sun at its zenith, the heat would be so great that he would not be able to lead his flock across the
fields. It was the time of day when all ofSpain slept during the summer. The heat lasted until nightfall, and
all that time he had to carry his jacket. But when he thought to complain about the burden of its weight,
he remembered that, because he had the jacket, he had withstood the cold of the dawn.

We have to be prepared for change, he thought, and he was grateful for the jacket's weight and warmth.

The jacket had a purpose, and so did the boy. His purpose in life was to travel, and, after two years of
walking the Andalusian terrain, he knew all the cities of the region. He was planning, on this visit, to
explain to the girl how it was that a simple shepherd knew how to read. That he had attended a seminary
until he was sixteen. His parents had wanted him to become a priest, and thereby a source of pride for a
simple farm family. They worked hard just to have food and water, like the sheep. He had studied Latin,
Spanish, and theology. But ever since he had been a child, he had wanted to know the world, and this
was much more important to him than knowing God and learning about man's sins. One afternoon, on a
visit to his family, he had summoned up the courage to tell his father that he didn't want to become a
priest. That he wanted to travel.



"People from all over the world have passed through this village, son," said his father. "They come in
search of new things, but when they leave they are basically the same people they were when they
arrived. They climb the mountain to see the castle, and they wind up thinking that the past was better than
what we have now. They have blond hair, or dark skin, but basically they're the same as the people who
live right here."

"But I'd like to see the castles in the towns where they live," the boy explained.

"Those people, when they see our land, say that they would like to live here forever," his father
continued.

"Well, I'd like to see their land, and see how they live," said his son.



"The people who come here have a lot of money to spend, so they can afford to travel," his father said.
"Amongst us, the only ones who travel are the shepherds."

"Well, then I'll be a shepherd!"

His father said no more. The next day, he gave his son a pouch that held three ancient Spanish gold
coins.

"I found these one day in the fields. I wanted them to be a part of your inheritance. But use them to buy
your flock. Take to the fields, and someday you'll learn that our countryside is the best, and our women
the most beautiful."

And he gave the boy his blessing. The boy could see in his father's gaze a desire to be able, himself, to
travel the world — a desire that was still alive, despite his father's having had to bury it, over dozens of
years, under the burden of struggling for water to drink, food to eat, and the same place to sleep every
night of his life.



The horizon was tinged with red, and suddenly the sun appeared. The boy thought back to that
conversation with his father, and felt happy; he had already seen many castles and met many women (but
none the equal of the one who awaited him several days hence). He owned a jacket, a book that he
could trade for another, and a flock of sheep. But, most important, he was able every day to live out his
dream. If he were to tire of the Andalusian fields, he could sell his sheep and go to sea. By the time he
had had enough of the sea, he would already have known other cities, other women, and other chances
to be happy. I couldn't have found God in the seminary, he thought, as he looked at the sunrise.

Whenever he could, he sought out a new road to travel. He had never been to that ruined church before,
in spite of having traveled through those parts many times. The world was huge and inexhaustible; he had
only to allow his sheep to set the route for a while, and he would discover other interesting things. The
problem is that they don't even realize that they're walking a new road every day. They don't see that the
fields are new and the seasons change. All they think about is food and water.

Maybe we're all that way, the boy mused. Even me — I haven't thought of other women since I met the
merchant's daughter. Looking at the sun, he calculated that he would reach Tarifa before midday. There,
he could exchange his book for a thicker one, fill his wine bottle, shave, and have a haircut; he had to
prepare himself for his meeting with the girl, and he didn't want to think about the possibility that some
other shepherd, with a larger flock of sheep, had arrived there before him and asked for her hand.

It's the possibility of having a dream come true that makes life interesting, he thought, as he looked again
at the position of the sun, and hurried his pace. He had suddenly remembered that, in Tarifa, there was an
old woman who interpreted dreams.



The old woman led the boy to a room at the back of her house; it was separated from her living room by
a curtain of colored beads. The room's furnishings consisted of a table, an image of the Sacred Heart of
Jesus, and two chairs.

The woman sat down, and told him to be seated as well. Then she took both of his hands in hers, and
began quietly to pray.



It sounded like a Gypsy prayer. The boy had already had experience on the road with Gypsies; they
also traveled, but they had no flocks of sheep. People said that Gypsies spent their lives tricking others. It
was also said that they had a pact with the devil, and that they kidnapped children and, taking them away
to their mysterious camps, made them their slaves. As a child, the boy had always been frightened to
death that he would be captured by Gypsies, and this childhood fear returned when the old woman took
his hands in hers.

But she has the Sacred Heart of Jesus there, he thought, trying to reassure himself. He didn't want his
hand to begin trembling, showing the old woman that he was fearful. He recited an Our Father silently.

"Very interesting," said the woman, never taking her eyes from the boy's hands, and then she fell silent.

The boy was becoming nervous. His hands began to tremble, and the woman sensed it. He quickly
pulled his hands away.

"I didn't come here to have you read my palm," he said, already regretting having come. He thought for a
moment that it would be better to pay her fee and leave without learning a thing, that he was giving too
much importance to his recurrent dream.

"You came so that you could learn about your dreams," said the old woman. "And dreams are the
language of God. When he speaks in our language, I can interpret what he has said. But if he speaks in
the language of the soul, it is only you who can understand. But, whichever it is, I'm going to charge you
for the consultation."

Another trick, the boy thought. But he decided to take a chance. A shepherd always takes his chances
with wolves and with drought, and that's what makes a shepherd's life exciting.

"I have had the same dream twice," he said. "I dreamed that I was in a field with my sheep, when a child
appeared and began to play with the animals. I don't like people to do that, because the sheep are afraid
of strangers. But children always seem to be able to play with them without frightening them. I don't
know why. I don't know how animals know the age of human beings."

"Tell me more about your dream," said the woman. "I have to get back to my cooking, and, since you
don't have much money, I can't give you a lot of time."

"The child went on playing with my sheep for quite a while," continued the boy, a bit upset. "And
suddenly, the child took me by both hands and transported me to the Egyptian pyramids."

He paused for a moment to see if the woman knew what the Egyptian pyramids were. But she said
nothing.

"Then, at the Egyptian pyramids," — he said the last three words slowly, so that the old woman would
understand — "the child said to me, If you come here, you will find a hidden treasure.' And, just as she
was about to show me the exact location, I woke up. Both times."

The woman was silent for some time. Then she again took his hands and studied them carefully.

"I'm not going to charge you anything now," she said. "But I want one-tenth of the treasure, if you find it."

The boy laughed — out of happiness. He was going to be able to save the little money he had because of



a dream about hidden treasure!

"Well, interpret the dream," he said.

"First, swear to me. Swear that you will give me one-tenth of your treasure in exchange for what I am
going to tell you."

The shepherd swore that he would. The old woman asked him to swear again while looking at the image
of the Sacred Heart of Jesus.

"It's a dream in the language of the world," she said. "I can interpret it, but the interpretation is very
difficult. That's why I feel that I deserve a part of what you find.

"And this is my interpretation: you must go to the Pyramids in Egypt. I have never heard of them, but, if it
was a child who showed them to you, they exist. There you will find a treasure that will make you a rich
man."

The boy was surprised, and then irritated. He didn't need to seek out the old woman for this! But then
he remembered that he wasn't going to have to pay anything.

"I didn't need to waste my time just for this," he said.

"I told you that your dream was a difficult one. It's the simple things in life that are the most
extraordinary; only wise men are able to understand them. And since I am not wise, I have had to learn
other arts, such as the reading of palms."

"Well, how am I going to get to Egypt?"

"I only interpret dreams. I don't know how to turn them into reality. That's why I have to live off what my
daughters provide me with."

"And what if I never get to Egypt?"

"Then I don't get paid. It wouldn't be the first time."

And the woman told the boy to leave, saying she had already wasted too much time with him.

So the boy was disappointed; he decided that he would never again believe in dreams. He remembered
that he had a number of things he had to take care of: he went to the market for something to eat, he
traded his book for one that was thicker, and he found a bench in the plaza where he could sample the
new wine he had bought. The day was hot, and the wine was refreshing. The sheep were at the gates of
the city, in a stable that belonged to a friend. The boy knew a lot of people in the city. That was what
made traveling appeal to him — he always made new friends, and he didn't need to spend all of his time
with them. When someone sees the same people every day, as had happened with him at the seminary,
they wind up becoming a part of that person's life. And then they want the person to change. If someone
isn't what others want them to be, the others become angry. Everyone seems to have a clear idea of how
other people should lead their lives, but none about his or her own.

He decided to wait until the sun had sunk a bit lower in the sky before following his flock back through
the fields. Three days from now, he would be with the merchant's daughter.



He started to read the book he had bought. On the very first page it described a burial ceremony. And
the names of the people involved were very difficult to pronounce. If he ever wrote a book, he thought,
he would present one person at a time, so that the reader wouldn't have to worry about memorizing a lot
of names.

When he was finally able to concentrate on what he was reading, he liked the book better; the burial
was on a snowy day, and he welcomed the feeling of being cold. As he read on, an old man sat down at
his side and tried to strike up a conversation.

"What are they doing?" the old man asked, pointing at the people in the plaza.

"Working," the boy answered dryly, making it look as if he wanted to concentrate on his reading.

Actually, he was thinking about shearing his sheep in front of the merchant's daughter, so that she could
see that he was someone who was capable of doing difficult things. He had already imagined the scene
many times; every time, the girl became fascinated when he explained that the sheep had to be sheared
from back to front. He also tried to remember some good stories to relate as he sheared the sheep. Most
of them he had read in books, but he would tell them as if they were from his personal experience. She
would never know the difference, because she didn't know how to read.

Meanwhile, the old man persisted in his attempt to strike up a conversation. He said that he was tired
and thirsty, and asked if he might have a sip of the boy's wine. The boy offered his bottle, hoping that the
old man would leave him alone.

But the old man wanted to talk, and he asked the boy what book he was reading. The boy was tempted
to be rude, and move to another bench, but his father had taught him to be respectful of the elderly. So
he held out the book to the man — for two reasons: first, that he, himself, wasn't sure how to pronounce
the title; and second, that if the old man didn't know how to read, he would probably feel ashamed and
decide of his own accord to change benches.

"Hmm. . . " said the old man, looking at all sides of the book, as if it were some strange object. "This is an
important book, but it's really irritating."

The boy was shocked. The old man knew how to read, and had already read the book. And if the book
was irritating, as the old man had said, the boy still had time to change it for another.

"It's a book that says the same thing almost all the other books in the world say," continued the old man.
"It describes people's inability to choose their own destinies. And it ends up saying that everyone believes
the world's greatest he."

"What's the world's greatest lie?" the boy asked, completely surprised.

"It's this: that at a certain point in our lives, we lose control of what's happening to us, and our lives
become controlled by fate. That's the world's greatest lie."

"That's never happened to me," the boy said. "They wanted me to be a priest, but I decided to become
a shepherd."

"Much better," said the old man. "Because you really like to travel."

"He knew what I was thinking," the boy said to himself. The old man, meanwhile, was leafing through the



book, without seeming to want to return it at all. The boy noticed that the man's clothing was strange. He
looked like an Arab, which was not unusual in those parts. Africa was only a few hours from Tarifa; one
had only to cross the narrow straits by boat. Arabs often appeared in the city, shopping and chanting
their strange prayers several times a day.

"Where are you from?" the boy asked.

"From many places."

"No one can be from many places," the boy said. "I'm a shepherd, and I have been to many places, but I
come from only one place — from a city near an ancient castle. That's where I was bom."

"Well then, we could say that I was bom in Salem."

The boy didn't know where Salem was, but he didn't want to ask, fearing that he would appear ignorant.
He looked at the people in the plaza for a while; they were coming and going, and all of them seemed to
be very busy.

"So, what is Salem like?" he asked, trying to get some sort of clue.

"It's like it always has been."

No clue yet. But he knew that Salem wasn't in Andalusia. If it were, he would already have heard of it.

"And what do you do in Salem?" he insisted.

"What do I do in Salem?" The old man laughed. "Well, I'm the king of Salem!"

People say strange things, the boy thought. Sometimes it's better to be with the sheep, who don't say
anything. And better still to be alone with one's books. They tell their incredible stories at the time when
you want to hear them. But when you're talking to people, they say some things that are so strange that
you don't know how to continue the conversation.

"My name is Melchizedek," said the old man. "How many sheep do you have?"

"Enough," said the boy. He could see that the old man wanted to know more about his life.

"Well, then, we've got a problem. I can't help you if you feel you've got enough sheep."

The boy was getting irritated. He wasn't asking for help. It was the old man who had asked for a drink
of his wine, and had started the conversation.

"Give me my book," the boy said. "I have to go and gather my sheep and get going."

"Give me one-tenth of your sheep," said the old man, "and I'll tell you how to find the hidden treasure."

The boy remembered his dream, and suddenly everything was clear to him. The old woman hadn't
charged him anything, but the old man — maybe he was her husband — was going to find a way to get
much more money in exchange for information about something that didn't even exist. The old man was
probably a Gypsy, too.



But before the boy could say anything, the old man leaned over, picked up a stick, and began to write in
the sand of the plaza. Something bright reflected from his chest with such intensity that the boy was
momentarily blinded. With a movement that was too quick for someone his age, the man covered
whatever it was with his cape. When his vision returned to normal, the boy was able to read what the old
man had written in the sand.

There, in the sand of the plaza of that small city, the boy read the names of his father and his mother and
the name of the seminary he had attended. He read the name of the merchant's daughter, which he hadn't
even known, and he read things he had never told anyone.



"I'm the king of Salem," the old man had said.

"Why would a king be talking with a shepherd?" the boy asked, awed and embarrassed.

"For several reasons. But let's say that the most important is that you have succeeded in discovering your
destiny."

The boy didn't know what a person's "destiny" was.

"It's what you have always wanted to accomplish. Everyone, when they are young, knows what their
destiny is.

"At that point in their lives, everything is clear and everything is possible. They are not afraid to dream,
and to yearn for everything they would like to see happen to them in their lives. But, as time passes, a
mysterious force begins to convince them that it will be impossible for them to realize their destiny."

None of what the old man was saying made much sense to the boy. But he wanted to know what the
"mysterious force" was; the merchant's daughter would be impressed when he told her about that!

"It's a force that appears to be negative, but actually shows you how to realize your destiny. It prepares
your spirit and your will, because there is one great truth on this planet: whoever you are, or whatever it is
that you do, when you really want something, it's because that desire originated in the soul of the
universe. It's your mission on earth."

"Even when all you want to do is travel? Or marry the daughter of a textile merchant?"

"Yes, or even search for treasure. The Soul of the World is nourished by people's happiness. And also
by unhappiness, envy, and jealousy. To realize one's destiny is a person's only real obligation. All things
are one.

"And, when you want something, all the universe conspires in helping you to achieve it."

They were both silent for a time, observing the plaza and the townspeople. It was the old man who
spoke first.

"Why do you tend a flock of sheep?"

"Because I like to travel."



The old man pointed to a baker standing in his shop window at one corner of the plaza. "When he was a
child, that man wanted to travel, too. But he decided first to buy his bakery and put some money aside.
When he's an old man, he's going to spend a month in Africa. He never realized that people are capable,
at any time in their lives, of doing what they dream of."

"He should have decided to become a shepherd," the boy said.

"Well, he thought about that," the old man said. "But bakers are more important people than shepherds.
Bakers have homes, while shepherds sleep out in the open. Parents would rather see their children marry
bakers than shepherds."

The boy felt a pang in his heart, thinking about the merchant's daughter. There was surely a baker in her
town.

The old man continued, "In the long run, what people think about shepherds and bakers becomes more
important for them than their own destinies."

The old man leafed through the book, and fell to reading a page he came to. The boy waited, and then
interrupted the old man just as he himself had been interrupted. "Why are you telling me all this?"

"Because you are trying to realize your destiny. And you are at the point where you're about to give it all
up."

"And that's when you always appear on the scene?"

"Not always in this way, but I always appear in one form or another. Sometimes I appear in the form of
a solution, or a good idea. At other times, at a crucial moment, I make it easier for things to happen.
There are other things I do, too, but most of the time people don't realize I've done them."

The old man related that, the week before, he had been forced to appear before a miner, and had taken
the form of a stone. The miner had abandoned everything to go mining for emeralds. For five years he
had been working a certain river, and had examined hundreds of thousands of stones looking for an
emerald. The miner was about to give it all up, right at the point when, if he were to examine just one
more stone — justone more — he would find his emerald. Since the miner had sacrificed everything to his
destiny, the old man decided to become involved. He transformed himself into a stone that rolled up to
the miner's foot. The miner, with all the anger and frustration of his five fruitless years, picked up the stone
and threw it aside. But he had thrown it with such force that it broke the stone it fell upon, and there,
embedded in the broken stone, was the most beautiful emerald in the world.

"People learn, early in their lives, what is their reason for being," said the old man, with a certain
bitterness. "Maybe that's why they give up on it so early, too. But that's the way it is."

The boy reminded the old man that he had said something about hidden treasure.

"Treasure is uncovered by the force of flowing water, and it is buried by the same currents," said the old
man. "If you want to learn about your own treasure, you will have to give me one-tenth of your flock."

"What about one-tenth of my treasure?"

The old man looked disappointed. "If you start out by promising what you don't even have yet, you'll
lose your desire to work toward getting it."



The boy told him that he had already promised to give one-tenth of his treasure to the Gypsy.

"Gypsies are experts at getting people to do that," sighed the old man. "In any case, it's good that you've
learned that everything in life has its price. This is what the Warriors of the Light try to teach."

The old man returned the book to the boy.

"Tomorrow, at this same time, bring me a tenth of your flock. And I will tell you how to find the hidden
treasure. Good afternoon."

And he vanished around the comer of the plaza.



The boy began again to read his book, but he was no longer able to concentrate. He was tense and
upset, because he knew that the old man was right. He went over to the bakery and bought a loaf of
bread, thinking about whether or not he should tell the baker what the old man had said about him.
Sometimes it's better to leave things as they are, he thought to himself, and decided to say nothing. If he
were to say anything, the baker would spend three days thinking about giving it all up, even though he
had gotten used to the way things were. The boy could certainly resist causing that kind of anxiety for the
baker. So he began to wander through the city, and found himself at the gates. There was a small building
there, with a window at which people bought tickets to Africa. And he knew that Egypt was in Africa.

"Can I help you?" asked the man behind the window.

"Maybe tomorrow," said the boy, moving away. If he sold just one of his sheep, he'd have enough to get
to the other shore of the strait. The idea frightened him.

"Another dreamer," said the ticket seller to his assistant, watching the boy walk away. "He doesn't have
enough money to travel."

While standing at the ticket window, the boy had remembered his flock, and decided he should go back
to being a shepherd. In two years he had learned everything about shepherding: he knew how to shear
sheep, how to care for pregnant ewes, and how to protect the sheep from wolves. He knew all the fields
and pastures of Andalusia. And he knew what was the fair price for every one of his animals.

He decided to return to his friend's stable by the longest route possible. As he walked past the city's
castle, he interrupted his return, and climbed the stone ramp that led to the top of the wall. From there, he
could see Africa in the distance. Someone had once told him that it was from there that the Moors had
come, to occupy all of Spain.

He could see almost the entire city from where he sat, including the plaza where he had talked with the
old man. Curse the moment I met that old man, he thought. He had come to the town only to find a
woman who could interpret his dream. Neither the woman nor the old man were at all impressed by the
fact that he was a shepherd. They were solitary individuals who no longer believed in things, and didn't
understand that shepherds become attached to their sheep. He knew everything about each member of
his flock: he knew which ones were lame, which one was to give birth two months from now, and which
were the laziest. He knew how to shear them, and how to slaughter them. If he ever decided to leave
them, they would suffer.



The wind began to pick up. He knew that wind: people called it the levanter, because on it the Moors
had come from the Levant at the eastern end of the Mediterranean.

The levanter increased in intensity. Here I am, between my flock and my treasure, the boy thought. He
had to choose between something he had become accustomed to and something he wanted to have.
There was also the merchant's daughter, but she wasn't as important as his flock, because she didn't
depend on him. Maybe she didn't even remember him. He was sure that it made no difference to her on
which day he appeared: for her, every day was the same, and when each day is the same as the next, it's
because people fail to recognize the good things that happen in their lives every day that the sun rises.

I left my father, my mother, and the town castle behind. They have gotten used to my being away, and
so have I. The sheep will get used to my not being there, too, the boy thought.

From where he sat, he could observe the plaza. People continued to come and go from the baker's
shop. A young couple sat on the bench where he had talked with the old man, and they kissed.

"That baker. . ." he said to himself, without completing the thought. The levanter was still getting stronger,
and he felt its force on his face. That wind had brought the Moors, yes, but it had also brought the smell
of the desert and of veiled women. It had brought with it the sweat and the dreams of men who had once
left to search for the unknown, and for gold and adventure — and for the Pyramids. The boy felt jealous
of the freedom of the wind, and saw that he could have the same freedom. There was nothing to hold him
back except himself. The sheep, the merchant's daughter, and the fields of Andalusia were only steps
along the way to his destiny.

The next day, the boy met the old man at noon. He brought six sheep with him.

"I'm surprised," the boy said. "My friend bought all the other sheep immediately. He said that he had
always dreamed of being a shepherd, and that it was a good omen."



"That's the way it always is," said the old man. "It's called the principle of favorability. When you play
cards the first time, you are almost sure to win. Beginner's luck."

"Why is that?"

"Because there is a force that wants you to realize your destiny; it whets your appetite with a taste of
success."

Then the old man began to inspect the sheep, and he saw that one was lame. The boy explained that it
wasn't important, since that sheep was the most intelligent of the flock, and produced the most wool.

"Where is the treasure?" he asked.

"It's in Egypt, near the Pyramids."

The boy was startled. The old woman had said the same thing. But she hadn't charged him anything.

"In order to find the treasure, you will have to follow the omens. God has prepared a path for everyone
to follow. You just have to read the omens that he left for you."

Before the boy could reply, a butterfly appeared and fluttered between him and the old man. He
remembered something his grandfather had once told him: that butterflies were a good omen. Like



crickets, and like expectations; like lizards and four-leaf clovers.

"That's right," said the old man, able to read the boy's thoughts. "Just as your grandfather taught you.
These are good omens."

The old man opened his cape, and the boy was struck by what he saw. The old man wore a breastplate
of heavy gold, covered with precious stones. The boy recalled the brilliance he had noticed on the
previous day.

He really was a king! He must be disguised to avoid encounters with thieves.

"Take these," said the old man, holding out a white stone and a black stone that had been embedded at
the center of the breastplate. "They are called Urim and Thummim. The black signifies 'yes,' and the white
'no.' When you are unable to read the omens, they will help you to do so. Always ask an objective
question.

"But, if you can, try to make your own decisions. The treasure is at the Pyramids; that you already knew.
But I had to insist on the payment of six sheep because I helped you to make your decision."

The boy put the stones in his pouch. From then on, he would make his own decisions.

"Don't forget that everything you deal with is only one thing and nothing else. And don't forget the
language of omens. And, above all, don't forget to follow your destiny through to its conclusion.

"But before I go, I want to tell you a little story.

"A certain shopkeeper sent his son to learn about the secret of happiness from the wisest man in the
world. The lad wandered through the desert for forty days, and finally came upon a beautiful castle, high
atop a mountain. It was there that the wise man lived.

"Rather than finding a saintly man, though, our hero, on entering the main room of the castle, saw a hive
of activity: tradesmen came and went, people were conversing in the corners, a small orchestra was
playing soft music, and there was a table covered with platters of the most delicious food in that part of
the world. The wise man conversed with everyone, and the boy had to wait for two hours before it was
his turn to be given the man's attention.

"The wise man listened attentively to the boy's explanation of why he had come, but told him that he
didn't have time just then to explain the secret of happiness. He suggested that the boy look around the
palace and return in two hours.

" 'Meanwhile, I want to ask you to do something,' said the wise man, handing the boy a teaspoon that
held two drops of oil. As you wander around, carry this spoon with you without allowing the oil to spill.'

"The boy began climbing and descending the many stairways of the palace, keeping his eyes fixed on the
spoon. After two hours, he returned to the room where the wise man was.

" Well,' asked the wise man, 'did you see the Persian tapestries that are hanging in my dining hall? Did
you see the garden that it took the master gardener ten years to create? Did you notice the beautiful
parchments in my library?'

"The boy was embarrassed, and confessed that he had observed nothing. His only concern had been not



to spill the oil that the wise man had entrusted to him.

" 'Then go back and observe the marvels of my world,' said the wise man. 'You cannot trust a man if you
don't know his house.'

"Relieved, the boy picked up the spoon and returned to his exploration of the palace, this time observing
all of the works of art on the ceilings and the walls. He saw the gardens, the mountains all around him, the
beauty of the flowers, and the taste with which everything had been selected. Upon returning to the wise
man, he related in detail everything he had seen.

" 'But where are the drops of oil I entrusted to you?' asked the wise man.

"Looking down at the spoon he held, the boy saw that the oil was gone.

" 'Well, there is only one piece of advice I can give you,' said the wisest of wise men. 'The secret of
happiness is to see all the marvels of the world, and never to forget the drops of oil on the spoon.' "

The shepherd said nothing. He had understood the story the old king had told him. A shepherd may like
to travel, but he should never forget about his sheep.

The old man looked at the boy and, with his hands held together, made several strange gestures over the
boy's head. Then, taking his sheep, he walked away.



At the highest point in Tarifa there is an old fort, built by the Moors. From atop its walls, one can catch a
glimpse of Africa. Melchizedek, the king of Salem, sat on the wall of the fort that afternoon, and felt the
levanter blowing in his face. The sheep fidgeted nearby, uneasy with their new owner and excited by so
much change. All they wanted was food and water.

Melchizedek watched a small ship that was plowing its way out of the port. He would never again see
the boy, just as he had never seen Abraham again after having charged him his one-tenth fee. That was
his work.

The gods should not have desires, because they don't have destinies. But the king of Salem hoped
desperately that the boy would be successful.

It's too bad that he's quickly going to forget my name, he thought. I should have repeated it for him.
Then when he spoke about me he would say that I am Melchizedek, the king of Salem.

He looked to the skies, feeling a bit abashed, and said, "I know it's the vanity of vanities, as you said, my
Lord. But an old king sometimes has to take some pride in himself."



How strange Africa is, thought the boy.

He was sitting in a bar very much like the other bars he had seen along the narrow streets of Tangier.
Some men were smoking from a gigantic pipe that they passed from one to the other. In just a few hours
he had seen men walking hand in hand, women with their faces covered, and priests that climbed to the
tops of towers and chanted — as everyone about him went to their knees and placed their foreheads on



the ground.

"A practice of infidels," he said to himself. As a child in church, he had always looked at the image of
Saint Santiago Matamoros on his white horse, his sword unsheathed, and figures such as these kneeling
at his feet. The boy felt ill and terribly alone. The infidels had an evil look about them.

Besides this, in the rush of his travels he had forgotten a detail, just one detail, which could keep him
from his treasure for a long time: only Arabic was spoken in this country.

The owner of the bar approached him, and the boy pointed to a drink that had been served at the next
table. It turned out to be a bitter tea. The boy preferred wine.

But he didn't need to worry about that right now. What he had to be concerned about was his treasure,
and how he was going to go about getting it. The sale of his sheep had left him with enough money in his
pouch, and the boy knew that in money there was magic; whoever has money is never really alone.
Before long, maybe in just a few days, he would be at the Pyramids. An old man, with a breastplate of
gold, wouldn't have lied just to acquire six sheep.

The old man had spoken about signs and omens, and, as the boy was crossing the strait, he had thought
about omens. Yes, the old man had known what he was talking about: during the time the boy had spent
in the fields of Andalusia, he had become used to learning which path he should take by observing the
ground and the sky. He had discovered that the presence of a certain bird meant that a snake was
nearby, and that a certain shrub was a sign that there was water in the area. The sheep had taught him
that.

If God leads the sheep so well, he will also lead a man, he thought, and that made him feel better. The
tea seemed less bitter.

"Who are you?" he heard a voice ask him in Spanish.

The boy was relieved. He was thinking about omens, and someone had appeared.

"How come you speak Spanish?" he asked. The new arrival was a young man in Western dress, but the
color of his skin suggested he was from this city. He was about the same age and height as the boy.

"Almost everyone here speaks Spanish. We're only two hours from Spain."

"Sit down, and let me treat you to something," said the boy. "And ask for a glass of wine for me. I hate
this tea."

"There is no wine in this country," the young man said. "The religion here forbids it."

The boy told him then that he needed to get to the Pyramids. He almost began to tell about his treasure,
but decided not to do so. If he did, it was possible that the Arab would want a part of it as payment for
taking him there. He remembered what the old man had said about offering something you didn't even
have yet.

"I'd like you to take me there if you can. I can pay you to serve as my guide."

"Do you have any idea how to get there?" the newcomer asked.



The boy noticed that the owner of the bar stood nearby, listening attentively to their conversation. He felt
uneasy at the man's presence. But he had found a guide, and didn't want to miss out on an opportunity.

"You have to cross the entire Sahara desert," said the young man. "And to do that, you need money. I
need to know whether you have enough."

The boy thought it a strange question. But he trusted in the old man, who had said that, when you really
want something, the universe always conspires in your favor.

He took his money from his pouch and showed it to the young man. The owner of the bar came over
and looked, as well. The two men exchanged some words in Arabic, and the bar owner seemed irritated.

"Let's get out of here" said the new arrival. "He wants us to leave."

The boy was relieved. He got up to pay the bill, but the owner grabbed him and began to speak to him
in an angry stream of words. The boy was strong, and wanted to retaliate, but he was in a foreign
country. His new friend pushed the owner aside, and pulled the boy outside with him. "He wanted your
money," he said. "Tangier is not like the rest of Africa. This is a port, and every port has its thieves."

The boy trusted his new friend. He had helped him out in a dangerous situation. He took out his money
and counted it.

"We could get to the Pyramids by tomorrow," said the other, taking the money. "But I have to buy two
camels."

They walked together through the narrow streets of Tangier. Everywhere there were stalls with items for
sale. They reached the center of a large plaza where the market was held. There were thousands of
people there, arguing, selling, and buying; vegetables for sale amongst daggers, and carpets displayed
alongside tobacco. But the boy never took his eye off his new friend. After all, he had all his money. He
thought about asking him to give it back, but decided that would be unfriendly. He knew nothing about
the customs of the strange land he was in.

"I'll just watch him," he said to himself. He knew he was stronger than his friend.

Suddenly, there in the midst of all that confusion, he saw the most beautiful sword he had ever seen. The
scabbard was embossed in silver, and the handle was black and encrusted with precious stones. The boy
promised himself that, when he returned from Egypt, he would buy that sword.

"Ask the owner of that stall how much the sword costs," he said to his friend. Then he realized that he
had been distracted for a few moments, looking at the sword. His heart squeezed, as if his chest had
suddenly compressed it. He was afraid to look around, because he knew what he would find. He
continued to look at the beautiful sword for a bit longer, until he summoned the courage to turn around.

All around him was the market, with people coming and going, shouting and buying, and the aroma of
strange foods. . . but nowhere could he find his new companion.

The boy wanted to believe that his friend had simply become separated from him by accident. He
decided to stay right there and await his return. As he waited, a priest climbed to the top of a nearby
tower and began his chant; everyone in the market fell to their knees, touched their foreheads to the
ground, and took up the chant. Then, like a colony of worker ants, they dismantled their stalls and left.



The sun began its departure, as well. The boy watched it through its trajectory for some time, until it was
hidden behind the white houses surrounding the plaza. He recalled that when the sun had risen that
morning, he was on another continent, still a shepherd with sixty sheep, and looking forward to meeting
with a girl. That morning he had known everything that was going to happen to him as he walked through
the familiar fields. But now, as the sun began to set, he was in a different country, a stranger in a strange
land, where he couldn't even speak the language. He was no longer a shepherd, and he had nothing, not
even the money to return and start everything over.

All this happened between sunrise and sunset, the boy thought. He was feeling sorry for himself, and
lamenting the fact that his life could have changed so suddenly and so drastically.

He was so ashamed that he wanted to cry. He had never even wept in front of his own sheep. But the
marketplace was empty, and he was far from home, so he wept. He wept because God was unfair, and
because this was the way God repaid those who believed in their dreams.

When I had my sheep, I was happy, and I made those around me happy. People saw me coming and
welcomed me, he thought. But now I'm sad and alone. I'm going to become bitter and distrustful of
people because one person betrayed me. I'm going to hate those who have found their treasure because
I never found mine. And I'm going to hold on to what little I have, because I'm too insignificant to
conquer the world.

He opened his pouch to see what was left of his possessions; maybe there was a bit left of the sandwich
he had eaten on the ship. But all he found was the heavy book, his jacket, and the two stones the old
man had given him.

As he looked at the stones, he felt relieved for some reason. He had exchanged six sheep for two
precious stones that had been taken from a gold breastplate. He could sell the stones and buy a return
ticket. But this time I'll be smarter, the boy thought, removing them from the pouch so he could put them
in his pocket. This was a port town, and the only truthful thing his friend had told him was that port towns
are full of thieves.

Now he understood why the owner of the bar had been so upset: he was trying to tell him not to trust
that man. "I'm like everyone else — I see the world in terms of what I would like to see happen, not what
actually does."

He ran his fingers slowly over the stones, sensing their temperature and feeling their surfaces. They were
his treasure. Just handling them made him feel better. They reminded him of the old man.

"When you want something, all the universe conspires in helping you to achieve it," he had said.

The boy was trying to understand the truth of what the old man had said. There he was in the empty
marketplace, without a cent to his name, and with not a sheep to guard through the night. But the stones
were proof that he had met with a king — a king who knew of the boy's past.

"They're called Urim and Thummim, and they can help you to read the omens." The boy put the stones
back in the pouch and decided to do an experiment. The old man had said to ask very clear questions,
and to do that, the boy had to know what he wanted. So, he asked if the old man's blessing was still with
him.

He took out one of the stones. It was "yes."



"Am I going to find my treasure?" he asked.

He stuck his hand into the pouch, and felt around for one of the stones. As he did so, both of them
pushed through a hole in the pouch and fell to the ground. The boy had never even noticed that there was
a hole in his pouch. He knelt down to find Urim and Thummim and put them back in the pouch. But as he
saw them lying there on the ground, another phrase came to his mind.

"Learn to recognize omens, and follow them," the old king had said.

An omen. The boy smiled to himself. He picked up the two stones and put them back in his pouch. He
didn't consider mending the hole — the stones could fall through any time they wanted. He had learned
that there were certain things one shouldn't ask about, so as not to flee from one's own destiny. "I
promised that I would make my own decisions," he said to himself.

But the stones had told him that the old man was still with him, and that made him feel more confident.
He looked around at the empty plaza again, feeling less desperate than before. This wasn't a strange
place; it was a new one.

After all, what he had always wanted was just that: to know new places. Even if he never got to the
Pyramids, he had already traveled farther than any shepherd he knew. Oh, if they only knew how
different things are just two hours by ship from where they are, he thought. Although his new world at the
moment was just an empty marketplace, he had already seen it when it was teeming with life, and he
would never forget it. He remembered the sword. It hurt him a bit to think about it, but he had never seen
one like it before. As he mused about these things, he realized that he had to choose between thinking of
himself as the poor victim of a thief and as an adventurer in quest of his treasure.

"I'm an adventurer, looking for treasure," he said to himself.



He was shaken into wakefulness by someone. He had fallen asleep in the middle of the marketplace, and
life in the plaza was about to resume.

Looking around, he sought his sheep, and then realized that he was in a new world. But instead of being
saddened, he was happy. He no longer had to seek out food and water for the sheep; he could go in
search of his treasure, instead. He had not a cent in his pocket, but he had faith. He had decided, the
night before, that he would be as much an adventurer as the ones he had admired in books.

He walked slowly through the market. The merchants were assembling their stalls, and the boy helped a
candy seller to do his. The candy seller had a smile on his face: he was happy, aware of what his life was
about, and ready to begin a day's work. His smile reminded the boy of the old man — the mysterious old
king he had met. "This candy merchant isn't making candy so that later he can travel or marry a
shopkeeper's daughter. He's doing it because it's what he wants to do," thought the boy. He realized that
he could do the same thing the old man had done — sense whether a person was near to or far from his
destiny. Just by looking at them. It's easy, and yet I've never done it before, he thought.

When the stall was assembled, the candy seller offered the boy the first sweet he had made for the day.
The boy thanked him, ate it, and went on his way. When he had gone only a short distance, he realized
that, while they were erecting the stall, one of them had spoken Arabic and the other Spanish.

And they had understood each other perfectly well.



There must be a language that doesn't depend on words, the boy thought. I've already had that
experience with my sheep, and now it's happening with people.

He was learning a lot of new things. Some of them were things that he had already experienced, and
weren't really new, but that he had never perceived before. And he hadn't perceived them because he
had become accustomed to them. He realized: If I can learn to understand this language without words, I
can learn to understand the world.

Relaxed and unhurried, he resolved that he would walk through the narrow streets of Tangier. Only in
that way would he be able to read the omens. He knew it would require a lot of patience, but shepherds
know all about patience. Once again he saw that, in that strange land, he was applying the same lessons
he had learned with his sheep.

"All things are one," the old man had said.



The crystal merchant awoke with the day, and felt the same anxiety that he felt every morning. He had
been in the same place for thirty years: a shop at the top of a hilly street where few customers passed.
Now it was too late to change anything — the only thing he had ever learned to do was to buy and sell
crystal glassware. There had been a time when many people knew of his shop: Arab merchants, French
and English geologists, German soldiers who were always well-heeled. In those days it had been
wonderful to be selling crystal, and he had thought how he would become rich, and have beautiful women
at his side as he grew older.

But, as time passed, Tangier had changed. The nearby city of Ceuta had grown faster than Tangier, and
business had fallen off. Neighbors moved away, and there remained only a few small shops on the hill.
And no one was going to climb the hill just to browse through a few small shops.

But the crystal merchant had no choice. He had lived thirty years of his life buying and selling crystal
pieces, and now it was too late to do anything else.

He spent the entire morning observing the infrequent comings and goings in the street. He had done this
for years, and knew the schedule of everyone who passed. But, just before lunchtime, a boy stopped in
front of the shop. He was dressed normally, but the practiced eyes of the crystal merchant could see that
the boy had no money to spend. Nevertheless, the merchant decided to delay his lunch for a few minutes
until the boy moved on.



A card hanging in the doorway announced that several languages were spoken in the shop. The boy saw
a man appear behind the counter.

"I can clean up those glasses in the window, if you want," said the boy. "The way they look now,
nobody is going to want to buy them."

The man looked at him without responding.

"In exchange, you could give me something to eat."



The man still said nothing, and the boy sensed that he was going to have to make a decision. In his
pouch, he had his jacket — he certainly wasn't going to need it in the desert. Taking the jacket out, he
began to clean the glasses. In half an hour, he had cleaned all the glasses in the window, and, as he was
doing so, two customers had entered the shop and bought some crystal.

When he had completed the cleaning, he asked the man for something to eat. "Let's go and have some
lunch," said the crystal merchant.

He put a sign on the door, and they went to a small cafe nearby. As they sat down at the only table in
the place, the crystal merchant laughed.

"You didn't have to do any cleaning," he said. "The Koran requires me to feed a hungry person."

"Well then, why did you let me do it?" the boy asked.

"Because the crystal was dirty. And both you and I needed to cleanse our minds of negative thoughts."

When they had eaten, the merchant turned to the boy and said, "I'd like you to work in my shop. Two
customers came in today while you were working, and that's a good omen."

People talk a lot about omens, thought the shepherd. But they really don't know what they're saying. Just
as I hadn't realized that for so many years I had been speaking a language without words to my sheep.

"Do you want to go to work for me?" the merchant asked.

"I can work for the rest of today," the boy answered. "I'll work all night, until dawn, and I'll clean every
piece of crystal in your shop. In return, I need money to get to Egypt tomorrow."

The merchant laughed. "Even if you cleaned my crystal for an entire year. . . even if you earned a good
commission selling every piece, you would still have to borrow money to get to Egypt. There are
thousands of kilometers of desert between here and there."

There was a moment of silence so profound that it seemed the city was asleep. No sound from the
bazaars, no arguments among the merchants, no men climbing to the towers to chant. No hope, no
adventure, no old kings or destinies, no treasure, and no Pyramids. It was as if the world had fallen silent
because the boy's soul had. He sat there, staring blankly through the door of the cafe, wishing that he had
died, and that everything would end forever at that moment.

The merchant looked anxiously at the boy. All the joy he had seen that morning had suddenly
disappeared.

"I can give you the money you need to get back to your country, my son," said the crystal merchant.

The boy said nothing. He got up, adjusted his clothing, and picked up his pouch.

"I'll work for you," he said.

And after another long silence, he added, "I need money to buy some sheep."

PART TWO



The boy had been working for the crystal merchant for almost a month, and he could see that it wasn't
exactly the kind of job that would make him happy. The merchant spent the entire day mumbling behind
the counter, telling the boy to be careful with the pieces and not to break anything.

But he stayed with the job because the merchant, although he was an old grouch, treated him fairly; the
boy received a good commission for each piece he sold, and had already been able to put some money
aside. That morning he had done some calculating: if he continued to work every day as he had been, he
would need a whole year to be able to buy some sheep.

"I'd like to build a display case for the crystal," the boy said to the merchant. "We could place it outside,
and attract those people who pass at the bottom of the hill."

"I've never had one before," the merchant answered. "People will pass by and bump into it, and pieces
will be broken."

"Well, when I took my sheep through the fields some of them might have died if we had come upon a
snake. But that's the way life is with sheep and with shepherds."

The merchant turned to a customer who wanted three crystal glasses. He was selling better than ever. . .
as if time had turned back to the old days when the street had been one of Tangier's major attractions.

"Business has really improved," he said to the boy, after the customer had left. "I'm doing much better,
and soon you'll be able to return to your sheep. Why ask more out of life?"

"Because we have to respond to omens," the boy said, almost without meaning to; then he regretted
what he had said, because the merchant had never met the king.

"It's called the principle of favorability, beginner's luck. Because life wants you to achieve your destiny,"
the old king had said.

But the merchant understood what the boy had said. The boy's very presence in the shop was an omen,
and, as time passed and money was pouring into the cash drawer, he had no regrets about having hired
the boy. The boy was being paid more money than he deserved, because the merchant, thinking that
sales wouldn't amount to much, had offered the boy a high commission rate. He had assumed he would
soon return to his sheep.

"Why did you want to get to the Pyramids?" he asked, to get away from the business of the display.

"Because I've always heard about them," the boy answered, saying nothing about his dream. The
treasure was now nothing but a painful memory, and he tried to avoid thinking about it.

"I don't know anyone around here who would want to cross the desert just to see the Pyramids," said
the merchant. "They're just a pile of stones. You could build one in your backyard."

"You've never had dreams of travel," said the boy, turning to wait on a customer who had entered the
shop.

Two days later, the merchant spoke to the boy about the display.



"I don't much like change," he said. "You and I aren't like Hassan, that rich merchant. If he makes a
buying mistake, it doesn't affect him much. But we two have to live with our mistakes."

That's true enough, the boy thought, ruefully.

"Why did you think we should have the display?"

"I want to get back to my sheep faster. We have to take advantage when luck is on our side, and do as
much to help it as it's doing to help us. It's called the principle of favorability. Or beginner's luck."

The merchant was silent for a few moments. Then he said, "The Prophet gave us the Koran, and left us
just five obligations to satisfy during our lives. The most important is to believe only in the one true God.
The others are to pray five times a day, fast during Ramadan, and be charitable to the poor."

He stopped there. His eyes filled with tears as he spoke of the Prophet. He was a devout man, and,
even with all his impatience, he wanted to live his life in accordance with Muslim law.

"What's the fifth obligation?" the boy asked.

"Two days ago, you said that I had never dreamed of travel," the merchant answered. "The fifth
obligation of every Muslim is a pilgrimage. We are obliged, at least once in our lives, to visit the holy city
of Mecca.

"Mecca is a lot farther away than the Pyramids. When I was young, all I wanted to do was put together
enough money to start this shop. I thought that someday I'd be rich, and could go to Mecca. I began to
make some money, but I could never bring myself to leave someone in charge of the shop; the crystals
are delicate things. At the same time, people were passing my shop all the time, heading for Mecca.
Some of them were rich pilgrims, traveling in caravans with servants and camels, but most of the people
making the pilgrimage were poorer than I.

"All who went there were happy at having done so. They placed the symbols of the pilgrimage on the
doors of their houses. One of them, a cobbler who made his living mending boots, said that he had
traveled for almost a year through the desert, but that he got more tired when he had to walk through the
streets of Tangier buying his leather."

"Well, why don't you go to Mecca now?" asked the boy.

"Because it's the thought of Mecca that keeps me alive. That's what helps me face these days that are all
the same, these mute crystals on the shelves, and lunch and dinner at that same horrible cafe. I'm afraid
that if my dream is realized, I'll have no reason to go on living.

"You dream about your sheep and the Pyramids, but you're different from me, because you want to
realize your dreams. I just want to dream about Mecca. I've already imagined a thousand times crossing
the desert, arriving at the Plaza of the Sacred Stone, the seven times I walk around it before allowing
myself to touch it. I've already imagined the people who would be at my side, and those in front of me,
and the conversations and prayers we would share. But I'm afraid that it would all be a disappointment,
so I prefer just to dream about it."

That day, the merchant gave the boy permission to build the display. Not everyone can see his dreams
come true in the same way.



Two more months passed, and the shelf brought many customers into the crystal shop. The boy
estimated that, if he worked for six more months, he could return to Spain and buy sixty sheep, and yet
another sixty. In less than a year, he would have doubled his flock, and he would be able to do business
with the Arabs, because he was now able to speak their strange language. Since that morning in the
marketplace, he had never again made use of Urim and Thummim, because Egypt was now just as
distant a dream for him as was Mecca for the merchant. Anyway, the boy had become happy in his
work, and thought all the time about the day when he would disembark at Tarifa as a winner.

"You must always know what it is that you want," the old king had said. The boy knew, and was now
working toward it. Maybe it was his treasure to have wound up in that strange land, met up with a thief,
and doubled the size of his flock without spending a cent.

He was proud of himself. He had learned some important things, like how to deal in crystal, and about
the language without words. . . and about omens. One afternoon he had seen a man at the top of the hill,
complaining that it was impossible to find a decent place to get something to drink after such a climb. The
boy, accustomed to recognizing omens, spoke to the merchant.

"Let's sell tea to the people who climb the hill."

"Lots of places sell tea around here," the merchant said.

"But we could sell tea in crystal glasses. The people will enjoy the tea and want to buy the glasses. I
have been told that beauty is the great seducer of men."

The merchant didn't respond, but that afternoon, after saying his prayers and closing the shop, he invited
the boy to sit with him and share his hookah, that strange pipe used by the Arabs.

"What is it you're looking for?" asked the old merchant.

"I've already told you. I need to buy my sheep back, so I have to earn the money to do so."

The merchant put some new coals in the hookah, and inhaled deeply.

"I've had this shop for thirty years. I know good crystal from bad, and everything else there is to know
about crystal. I know its dimensions and how it behaves. If we serve tea in crystal, the shop is going to
expand. And then I'll have to change my way of life."

"Well, isn't that good?"

"I'm already used to the way things are. Before you came, I was thinking about how much time I had
wasted in the same place, while my friends had moved on, and either went bankrupt or did better than
they had before. It made me very depressed. Now, I can see that it hasn't been too bad. The shop is
exactly the size I always wanted it to be. I don't want to change anything, because I don't know how to
deal with change. I'm used to the way I am."

The boy didn't know what to say. The old man continued, "You have been a real blessing to me. Today,
I understand something I didn't see before: every blessing ignored becomes a curse. I don't want anything
else in life. But you are forcing me to look at wealth and at horizons I have never known. Now that I
have seen them, and now that I see how immense my possibilities are, I'm going to feel worse than I did



before you arrived. Because I know the things I should be able to accomplish, and I don't want to do
so."

It's good I refrained from saying anything to the baker in Tarifa, thought the boy to himself.

They went on smoking the pipe for a while as the sun began to set. They were conversing in Arabic, and
the boy was proud of himself for being able to do so. There had been a time when he thought that his
sheep could teach him everything he needed to know about the world. But they could never have taught
him Arabic.

There are probably other things in the world that the sheep can't teach me, thought the boy as he
regarded the old merchant. All they ever do, really, is look for food and water. And maybe it wasn't that
they were teaching me, but that I was learning from them.

"Maktub," the merchant said, finally.

"What does that mean?"

"You would have to have been bom an Arab to understand," he answered. "But in your language it
would be something like It is written.' "

And, as he smothered the coals in the hookah, he told the boy that he could begin to sell tea in the
crystal glasses. Sometimes, there's just no way to hold back the river.



The men climbed the hill, and they were tired when they reached the top. But there they saw a crystal
shop that offered refreshing mint tea. They went in to drink the tea, which was served in beautiful crystal
glasses.

"My wife never thought of this," said one, and he bought some crystal — he was entertaining guests that
night, and the guests would be impressed by the beauty of the glassware. The other man remarked that
tea was always more delicious when it was served in crystal, because the aroma was retained. The third
said that it was a tradition in the Orient to use crystal glasses for tea because it had magical powers.

Before long, the news spread, and a great many people began to climb the hill to see the shop that was
doing something new in a trade that was so old. Other shops were opened that served tea in crystal, but
they weren't at the top of a hill, and they had little business.

Eventually, the merchant had to hire two more employees. He began to import enormous quantities of
tea, along with his crystal, and his shop was sought out by men and women with a thirst for things new.

And, in that way, the months passed.



The boy awoke before dawn. It had been eleven months and nine days since he had first set foot on the
African continent.

He dressed in his Arabian clothing of white linen, bought especially for this day. He put his headcloth in
place and secured it with a ring made of camel skin. Wearing his new sandals, he descended the stairs



silently.

The city was still sleeping. He prepared himself a sandwich and drank some hot tea from a crystal glass.
Then he sat in the sun-filled doorway, smoking the hookah.

He smoked in silence, thinking of nothing, and listening to the sound of the wind that brought the scent of
the desert. When he had finished his smoke, he reached into one of his pockets, and sat there for a few
moments, regarding what he had withdrawn.

It was a bundle of money. Enough to buy himself a hundred and twenty sheep, a return ticket, and a
license to import products from Africa into his own country.

He waited patiently for the merchant to awaken and open the shop. Then the two went off to have some
more tea.

"I'm leaving today," said the boy. "I have the money I need to buy my sheep. And you have the money
you need to go to Mecca."

The old man said nothing.

"Will you give me your blessing?" asked the boy. "You have helped me." The man continued to prepare
his tea, saying nothing. Then he turned to the boy.

"I am proud of you," he said. "You brought a new feeling into my crystal shop. But you know that I'm
not going to go to Mecca. Just as you know that you're not going to buy your sheep."

"Who told you that?" asked the boy, startled.

"Maktub " said the old crystal merchant.

And he gave the boy his blessing.



The boy went to his room and packed his belongings. They filled three sacks. As he was leaving, he
saw, in the comer of the room, his old shepherd's pouch. It was bunched up, and he had hardly thought
of it for a long time. As he took his j acket out of the pouch, thinking to give it to someone in the street,
the two stones fell to the floor. Urim and Thummim.

It made the boy think of the old king, and it startled him to realize how long it had been since he had
thought of him. For nearly a year, he had been working incessantly, thinking only of putting aside enough
money so that he could return to Spain with pride.

"Never stop dreaming," the old king had said. "Follow the omens."

The boy picked up Urim and Thummim, and, once again, had the strange sensation that the old king was
nearby. He had worked hard for a year, and the omens were that it was time to go.

I'm going to go back to doing just what I did before, the boy thought. Even though the sheep didn't teach
me to speak Arabic.



But the sheep had taught him something even more important: that there was a language in the world that
everyone understood, a language the boy had used throughout the time that he was trying to improve
things at the shop. It was the language of enthusiasm, of things accomplished with love and purpose, and
as part of a search for something believed in and desired. Tangier was no longer a strange city, and he
felt that, just as he had conquered this place, he could conquer the world.

"When you want something, all the universe conspires to help you achieve it," the old king had said.

But the old king hadn't said anything about being robbed, or about endless deserts, or about people who
know what their dreams are but don't want to realize them. The old king hadn't told him that the
Pyramids were just a pile of stones, or that anyone could build one in his backyard. And he had forgotten
to mention that, when you have enough money to buy a flock larger than the one you had before, you
should buy it.

The boy picked up his pouch and put it with his other things. He went down the stairs and found the
merchant waiting on a foreign couple, while two other customers walked about the shop, drinking tea
from crystal glasses. It was more activity than usual for this time of the morning. From where he stood, he
saw for the first time that the old merchant's hair was very much like the hair of the old king. He
remembered the smile of the candy seller, on his first day in Tangier, when he had nothing to eat and
nowhere to go — that smile had also been like the old king's smile.

It's almost as if he had been here and left his mark, he thought. And yet, none of these people has ever
met the old king. On the other hand, he said that he always appeared to help those who are trying to
realize their destiny.

He left without saying good-bye to the crystal merchant. He didn't want to cry with the other people
there. He was going to miss the place and all the good things he had learned. He was more confident in
himself, though, and felt as though he could conquer the world.

"But I'm going back to the fields that I know, to take care of my flock again." He said that to himself with
certainty, but he was no longer happy with his decision. He had worked for an entire year to make a
dream come true, and that dream, minute by minute, was becoming less important. Maybe because that
wasn't really his dream.

Who knows. . . maybe it's better to be like the crystal merchant: never go to Mecca, and just go through
life wanting to do so, he thought, again trying to convince himself. But as he held Urim and Thurnmim in
his hand, they had transmitted to him the strength and will of the old king. By coincidence — or maybe it
was an omen, the boy thought — he came to the bar he had entered on his first day there. The thief wasn't
there, and the owner brought him a cup of tea.

I can always go back to being a shepherd, the boy thought. I learned how to care for sheep, and I
haven't forgotten how that's done. But maybe I'll never have another chance to get to the Pyramids in
Egypt. The old man wore a breastplate of gold, and he knew about my past. He really was a king, a wise
king.

The hills of Andalusia were only two hours away, but there was an entire desert between him and the
Pyramids. Yet the boy felt that there was another way to regard his situation: he was actually two hours
closer to his treasure. . . the fact that the two hours had stretched into an entire year didn't matter.

I know why I want to get back to my flock, he thought. I understand sheep; they're no longer a problem,
and they can be good friends. On the other hand, I don't know if the desert can be a friend, and it's in the



desert that I have to search for my treasure. If I don't find it, I can always go home. I finally have enough
money, and all the time I need. Why not?

He suddenly felt tremendously happy. He could always go back to being a shepherd. He could always
become a crystal salesman again. Maybe the world had other hidden treasures, but he had a dream, and
he had met with a king. That doesn't happen to just anyone!

He was planning as he left the bar. He had remembered that one of the crystal merchant's suppliers
transported his crystal by means of caravans that crossed the desert. He held Urim and Thummim in his
hand; because of those two stones, he was once again on the way to his treasure.

"I am always nearby, when someone wants to realize their destiny," the old king had told him.

What could it cost to go over to the supplier's warehouse and find out if the Pyramids were really that far
away?



The Englishman was sitting on a bench in a structure that smelled of animals, sweat, and dust; it was part
warehouse, part corral. I never thought I'd end up in a place like this, he thought, as he leafed through the
pages of a chemical journal. Ten years at the university, and here I am in a corral.

But he had to move on. He believed in omens. All his life and all his studies were aimed at finding the
one true language of the universe. First he had studied Esperanto, then the world's religions, and now it
was alchemy. He knew how to speak Esperanto, he understood all the major religions well, but he wasn't
yet an alchemist. He had unraveled the truths behind important questions, but his studies had taken him to
a point beyond which he could not seem to go. He had tried in vain to establish a relationship with an
alchemist. But the alchemists were strange people, who thought only about themselves, and almost
always refused to help him. Who knows, maybe they had failed to discover the secret of the Master
Work — the Philosopher's Stone — and for this reason kept their knowledge to themselves.

He had already spent much of the fortune left to him by his father, fruitlessly seeking the Philosopher's
Stone. He had spent enormous amounts of time at the great libraries of the world, and had purchased all
the rarest and most important volumes on alchemy. In one he had read that, many years ago, a famous
Arabian alchemist had visited Europe. It was said that he was more than two hundred years old, and that
he had discovered the Philosopher's Stone and the Elixir of Life. The Englishman had been profoundly
impressed by the story. But he would never have thought it more than just a myth, had not a friend of
his — retorting from an archaeological expedition in the desert — told him about an Arab that was
possessed of exceptional powers.

"He lives at the Al-Fayoum oasis," his friend had said. "And people say that he is two hundred years old,
and is able to transform any metal into gold."

The Englishman could not contain his excitement. He canceled all his commitments and pulled together
the most important of his books, and now here he was, sitting inside a dusty, smelly warehouse. Outside,
a huge caravan was being prepared for a crossing of the Sahara, and was scheduled to pass through
Al-Fayoum.

I'm going to find that damned alchemist, the Englishman thought. And the odor of the animals became a
bit more tolerable.



A young Arab, also loaded down with baggage, entered, and greeted the Englishman.

"Where are you bound?" asked the young Arab.

"I'm going into the desert," the man answered, turning back to his reading. He didn't want any
conversation at this point. What he needed to do was review all he had learned over the years, because
the alchemist would certainly put him to the test.

The young Arab took out a book and began to read. The book was written in Spanish. That's good,
thought the Englishman. He spoke Spanish better than Arabic, and, if this boy was going to Al-Fayoum,
there would be someone to talk to when there were no other important things to do.



"That's strange," said the boy, as he tried once again to read the burial scene that began the book. "I've
been trying for two years to read this book, and I never get past these first few pages." Even without a
king to provide an interruption, he was unable to concentrate.

He still had some doubts about the decision he had made. But he was able to understand one thing:
making a decision was only the beginning of things. When someone makes a decision, he is really diving
into a strong current that will carry him to places he had never dreamed of when he first made the
decision.

When I decided to seek out my treasure, I never imagined that I'd wind up working in a crystal shop, he
thought. And joining this caravan may have been my decision, but where it goes is going to be a mystery
tome.

Nearby was the Englishman, reading a book. He seemed unfriendly, and had looked irritated when the
boy had entered. They might even have become friends, but the Englishman closed off the conversation.

The boy closed his book. He felt that he didn't want to do anything that might make him look like the
Englishman. He took Urim and Thummim from his pocket, and began playing with them.

The stranger shouted, "Urim and Thummim!"

In a flash the boy put them back in his pocket.

"They're not for sale," he said.

"They're not worth much," the Englishman answered. "They're only made of rock crystal, and there are
millions of rock crystals in the earth. But those who know about such things would know that those are
Urim and Thummim. I didn't know that they had them in this part of the world."

"They were given to me as a present by a king," the boy said.

The stranger didn't answer; instead, he put his hand in his pocket, and took out two stones that were the
same as the boy's.

"Did you say a king?" he asked.

"I guess you don't believe that a king would talk to someone like me, a shepherd," he said, wanting to



end the conversation.

"Not at all. It was shepherds who were the first to recognize a king that the rest of the world refused to
acknowledge. So, it's not surprising that kings would talk to shepherds."

And he went on, fearing that the boy wouldn't understand what he was talking about, "It's in the Bible.
The same book that taught me about Urim and Thummim. These stones were the only form of divination
permitted by God. The priests carried them in a golden breastplate."

The boy was suddenly happy to be there at the warehouse.

"Maybe this is an omen," said the Englishman, half aloud.

"Who told you about omens?" The boy's interest was increasing by the moment.

"Everything in life is an omen," said the Englishman, now closing the journal he was reading. "There is a
universal language, understood by everybody, but already forgotten. I am in search of that universal
language, among other things. That's why I'm here. I have to find a man who knows that universal
language. An alchemist."

The conversation was interrupted by the warehouse boss.

"You're in luck, you two," the fat Arab said. "There's a caravan leaving today for Al-Fayoum."

"But I'm going to Egypt," the boy said.

"Al-Fayoum is in Egypt," said the Arab. "What kind of Arab are you?"

"That's a good luck omen," the Englishman said, after the fat Arab had gone out. "If I could, I'd write a
huge encyclopedia just about the wordsluck anticoincidence. It's with those words that the universal
language is written."

He told the boy it was no coincidence that he had met him with Urim and Thummim in his hand. And he
asked the boy if he, too, were in search of the alchemist.

"I'm looking for a treasure," said the boy, and he immediately regretted having said it. But the Englishman
appeared not to attach any importance to it.

"In a way, so am I," he said.

"I don't even know what alchemy is," the boy was saying, when the warehouse boss called to them to
come outside.



"I'm the leader of the caravan," said a dark-eyed, bearded man. "I hold the power of life and death for
every person I take with me. The desert is a capricious lady, and sometimes she drives men crazy."

There were almost two hundred people gathered there, and four hundred animals — camels, horses,
mules, and fowl. In the crowd were women, children, and a number of men with swords at their belts and
rifles slung on their shoulders. The Englishman had several suitcases filled with books. There was a



babble of noise, and the leader had to repeat himself several times for everyone to understand what he
was saying.

"There are a lot of different people here, and each has his own God. But the only God I serve is Allah,
and in his name I swear that I will do everything possible once again to win out over the desert. But I
want each and every one of you to swear by the God you believe in that you will follow my orders no
matter what. In the desert, disobedience means death."

There was a murmur from the crowd. Each was swearing quietly to his or her own God. The boy swore
to Jesus Christ. The Englishman said nothing. And the murmur lasted longer than a simple vow would
have. The people were also praying to heaven for protection.

A long note was sounded on a bugle, and everyone mounted up. The boy and the Englishman had
bought camels, and climbed uncertainly onto their backs. The boy felt sorry for the Englishman's camel,
loaded down as he was with the cases of books.

"There's no such thing as coincidence," said the Englishman, picking up the conversation where it had
been interrupted in the warehouse. "I'm here because a friend of mine heard of an Arab who. . . "

But the caravan began to move, and it was impossible to hear what the Englishman was saying. The boy
knew what he was about to describe, though: the mysterious chain that links one thing to another, the
same chain that had caused him to become a shepherd, that had caused his recurring dream, that had
brought him to a city near Africa, to find a king, and to be robbed in order to meet a crystal merchant,
and...

The closer one gets to realizing his destiny, the more that destiny becomes his true reason for being,
thought the boy.

The caravan moved toward the east. It traveled during the morning, halted when the sun was at its
strongest, and resumed late in the afternoon. The boy spoke very little with the Englishman, who spent
most of his time with his books.

The boy observed in silence the progress of the animals and people across the desert. Now everything
was quite different from how it was that day they had set out: then, there had been confusion and
shouting, the cries of children and the whinnying of animals, all mixed with the nervous orders of the
guides and the merchants.

But, in the desert, there was only the sound of the eternal wind, and of the hoofbeats of the animals.
Even the guides spoke very little to one another.

"I've crossed these sands many times," said one of the camel drivers one night. "But the desert is so
huge, and the horizons so distant, that they make a person feel small, and as if he should remain silent."

The boy understood intuitively what he meant, even without ever having set foot in the desert before.
Whenever he saw the sea, or a fire, he fell silent, impressed by their elemental force.

I've learned things from the sheep, and I've learned things from crystal, he thought. I can learn something
from the desert, too. It seems old and wise.

The wind never stopped, and the boy remembered the day he had sat at the fort in Tarifa with this same
wind blowing in his face. It reminded him of the wool from his sheep. . . his sheep who were now seeking



food and water in the fields of Andalusia, as they always had.

"They're not my sheep anymore," he said to himself, without nostalgia. "They must be used to their new
shepherd, and have probably already forgotten me. That's good. Creatures like the sheep, that are used
to traveling, know about moving on."

He thought of the merchant's daughter, and was sure that she had probably married. Perhaps to a baker,
or to another shepherd who could read and could tell her exciting stories — after all, he probably wasn't
the only one. But he was excited at his intuitive understanding of the camel driver's comment: maybe he
was also learning the universal language that deals with the past and the present of all people. "Hunches,"
his mother used to call them. The boy was beginning to understand that intuition is really a sudden
immersion of the soul into the universal current of life, where the histories of all people are connected, and
we are able to know everything, because it's all written there.

"Maktub" the boy said, remembering the crystal merchant.

The desert was all sand in some stretches, and rocky in others. When the caravan was blocked by a
boulder, it had to go around it; if there was a large rocky area, they had to make a major detour. If the
sand was too fine for the animals' hooves, they sought a way where the sand was more substantial. In
some places, the ground was covered with the salt of dried-up lakes. The animals balked at such places,
and the camel drivers were forced to dismount and unburden their charges. The drivers carried the freight
themselves over such treacherous footing, and then reloaded the camels. If a guide were to fall ill or die,
the camel drivers would draw lots and appoint a new one.

But all this happened for one basic reason: no matter how many detours and adjustments it made, the
caravan moved toward the same compass point. Once obstacles were overcome, it returned to its
course, sighting on a star that indicated the location of the oasis. When the people saw that star shining in
the morning sky, they knew they were on the right course toward water, palm trees, shelter, and other
people. It was only the Englishman who was unaware of all this; he was, for the most part, immersed in
reading his books.

The boy, too, had his book, and he had tried to read it during the first few days of the journey. But he
found it much more interesting to observe the caravan and listen to the wind. As soon as he had learned
to know his camel better, and to establish a relationship with him, he threw the book away. Although the
boy had developed a superstition that each time he opened the book he would learn something
important, he decided it was an unnecessary burden.

He became friendly with the camel driver who traveled alongside him. At night, as they sat around the
fire, the boy related to the driver his adventures as a shepherd.

During one of these conversations, the driver told of his own life.

"I used to live near El Cairum," he said. "I had my orchard, my children, and a life that would change not
at all until I died. One year, when the crop was the best ever, we all went to Mecca, and I satisfied the
only unmet obligation in my life. I could die happily, and that made me feel good.

"One day, the earth began to tremble, and the Nile overflowed its banks. It was something that I thought
could happen only to others, never to me. My neighbors feared they would lose all their olive trees in the
flood, and my wife was afraid that we would lose our children. I thought that everything I owned would
be destroyed.



"The land was ruined, and I had to find some other way to earn a living. So now I'm a camel driver. But
that disaster taught me to understand the word of Allah: people need not fear the unknown if they are
capable of achieving what they need and want.

"We are afraid of losing what we have, whether it's our life or our possessions and property. But this
fear evaporates when we understand that our life stories and the history of the world were written by the
same hand."

Sometimes, their caravan met with another. One always had something that the other needed — as if
everything were indeed written by one hand. As they sat around the fire, the camel drivers exchanged
information about windstorms, and told stories about the desert.

At other times, mysterious, hooded men would appear; they were Bedouins who did surveillance along
the caravan route. They provided warnings about thieves and barbarian tribes. They came in silence and
departed the same way, dressed in black garments that showed only their eyes. One night, a camel driver
came to the fire where the Englishman and the boy were sitting. "There are rumors of tribal wars," he told
them.

The three fell silent. The boy noted that there was a sense of fear in the air, even though no one said
anything. Once again he was experiencing the language without words. . . the universal language.

The Englishman asked if they were in danger.

"Once you get into the desert, there's no going back," said the camel driver. "And, when you can't go
back, you have to worry only about the best way of moving forward. The rest is up to Allah, including
the danger."

And he concluded by saying the mysterious word: "Maktub"

"You should pay more attention to the caravan," the boy said to the Englishman, after the camel driver
had left. "We make a lot of detours, but we're always heading for the same destination."

"And you ought to read more about the world," answered the Englishman. "Books are like caravans in
that respect."

The immense collection of people and animals began to travel faster. The days had always been silent,
but now, even the nights — when the travelers were accustomed to talking around the fires — had also
become quiet. And, one day, the leader of the caravan made the decision that the fires should no longer
be lighted, so as not to attract attention to the caravan.

The travelers adopted the practice of arranging the animals in a circle at night, sleeping together in the
center as protection against the nocturnal cold. And the leader posted armed sentinels at the fringes of the
group.

The Englishman was unable to sleep one night. He called to the boy, and they took a walk along the
dunes surrounding the encampment. There was a full moon, and the boy told the Englishman the story of
his life.

The Englishman was fascinated with the part about the progress achieved at the crystal shop after the
boy began working there.



"That's the principle that governs all things," he said. "In alchemy, it's called the Soul of the World. When
you want something with all your heart, that's when you are closest to the Soul of the World. It's always a
positive force."

He also said that this was not just a human gift, that everything on the face of the earth had a soul,
whether mineral, vegetable, or animal — or even just a simple thought.

"Everything on earth is being continuously transformed, because the earth is alive. . . and it has a soul. We
are part of that soul, so we rarely recognize that it is working for us. But in the crystal shop you probably
realized that even the glasses were collaborating in your success."

The boy thought about that for a while as he looked at the moon and the bleached sands. "I have
watched the caravan as it crossed the desert," he said. "The caravan and the desert speak the same
language, and it's for that reason that the desert allows the crossing. It's going to test the caravan's every
step to see if it's in time, and, if it is, we will make it to the oasis."

"If either of us had joined this caravan based only on personal courage, but without understanding that
language, this journey would have been much more difficult."

They stood there looking at the moon.

"That's the magic of omens," said the boy. "I've seen how the guides read the signs of the desert, and
how the soul of the caravan speaks to the soul of the desert."

The Englishman said, "I'd better pay more attention to the caravan."

"And I'd better read your books," said the boy.



They were strange books. They spoke about mercury, salt, dragons, and kings, and he didn't understand
any of it. But there was one idea that seemed to repeat itself throughout all the books: all things are the
manifestation of one thing only.

In one of the books he learned that the most important text in the literature of alchemy contained only a
few lines, and had been inscribed on the surface of an emerald.

"It's the Emerald Tablet," said the Englishman, proud that he might teach something to the boy.

"Well, then, why do we need all these books?" the boy asked.

"So that we can understand those few lines," the Englishman answered, without appearing really to
believe what he had said.

The book that most interested the boy told the stories of the famous alchemists. They were men who
had dedicated their entire lives to the purification of metals in their laboratories; they believed that, if a
metal were heated for many years, it would free itself of all its individual properties, and what was left
would be the Soul of the World. This Soul of the World allowed them to understand anything on the face
of the earth, because it was the language with which all things communicated. They called that discovery
the Master Work — it was part liquid and part solid.



"Can't you just observe men and omens in order to understand the language?" the boy asked.

"You have a mania for simplifying everything," answered the Englishman, irritated. "Alchemy is a serious
discipline. Every step has to be followed exactly as it was followed by the masters."

The boy learned that the liquid part of the Master Work was called the Elixir of Life, and that it cured all
illnesses; it also kept the alchemist from growing old. And the solid part was called the Philosopher's
Stone.

"It's not easy to find the Philosopher's Stone," said the Englishman. "The alchemists spent years in their
laboratories, observing the fire that purified the metals. They spent so much time close to the fire that
gradually they gave up the vanities of the world. They discovered that the purification of the metals had
led to a purification of themselves."

The boy thought about the crystal merchant. He had said that it was a good thing for the boy to clean the
crystal pieces, so that he could free himself from negative thoughts. The boy was becoming more and
more convinced that alchemy could be learned in one's daily life.

"Also," said the Englishman, "the Philosopher's Stone has a fascinating property. A small sliver of the
stone can transform large quantities of metal into gold."

Having heard that, the boy became even more interested in alchemy. He thought that, with some
patience, he'd be able to transform everything into gold. He read the lives of the various people who had
succeeded in doing so: Helvetius, Elias, Fulcanelli, and Geber. They were fascinating stories: each of
them lived out his destiny to the end. They traveled, spoke with wise men, performed miracles for the
incredulous, and owned the Philosopher's Stone and the Elixir of Life.

But when the boy wanted to learn how to achieve the Master Work, he became completely lost. There
were just drawings, coded instructions, and obscure texts.



"Why do they make things so complicated?" he asked the Englishman one night. The boy had noticed
that the Englishman was irritable, and missed his books.

"So that those who have the responsibility for understanding can understand," he said. "Imagine if
everyone went around transforming lead into gold. Gold would lose its value.

"It's only those who are persistent, and willing to study things deeply, who achieve the Master Work.
That's why I'm here in the middle of the desert. I'm seeking a true alchemist who will help me to decipher
the codes."

"When were these books written?" the boy asked.

"Many centuries ago."

"They didn't have the printing press in those days," the boy argued. "There was no way for everybody to
know about alchemy. Why did they use such strange language, with so many drawings?"

The Englishman didn't answer him directly. He said that for the past few days he had been paying
attention to how the caravan operated, but that he hadn't learned anything new. The only thing he had



noticed was that talk of war was becoming more and more frequent.



Then one day the boy returned the books to the Englishman. "Did you learn anything?" the Englishman
asked, eager to hear what it might be. He needed someone to talk to so as to avoid thinking about the
possibility of war.

"I learned that the world has a soul, and that whoever understands that soul can also understand the
language of things. I learned that many alchemists realized their destinies, and wound up discovering the
Soul of the World, the Philosopher's Stone, and the Elixir of Life.

"But, above all, I learned that these things are all so simple that they could be written on the surface of an
emerald."

The Englishman was disappointed. The years of research, the magic symbols, the strange words and the
laboratory equipment. . . none of this had made an impression on the boy. His soul must be too primitive
to understand those things, he thought.

He took back his books and packed them away again in their bags.

"Go back to watching the caravan," he said. "That didn't teach me anything, either."

The boy went back to contemplating the silence of the desert, and the sand raised by the animals.
"Everyone has his or her own way of learning things," he said to himself. "His way isn't the same as mine,
nor mine as his. But we're both in search of our destinies, and I respect him for that."



The caravan began to travel day and night. The hooded Bedouins reappeared more and more
frequently, and the camel driver — who had become a good friend of the boy's — explained that the war
between the tribes had already begun. The caravan would be very lucky to reach the oasis.

The animals were exhausted, and the men talked among themselves less and less. The silence was the
worst aspect of the night, when the mere groan of a camel — which before had been nothing but the groan
of a camel — now frightened everyone, because it might signal a raid.

The camel driver, though, seemed not to be very concerned with the threat of war.

"I'm alive," he said to the boy, as they ate a bunch of dates one night, with no fires and no moon. "When
I'm eating, that's all I think about. If I'm on the march, I just concentrate on marching. If I have to fight, it
will be just as good a day to die as any other.

"Because I don't live in either my past or my future. I'm interested only in the present. If you can
concentrate always on the present, you'll be a happy man. You'll see that there is life in the desert, that
there are stars in the heavens, and that tribesmen fight because they are part of the human race. Life will
be a party for you, a grand festival, because life is the moment we're living right now."

Two nights later, as he was getting ready to bed down, the boy looked for the star they followed every
night. He thought that the horizon was a bit lower than it had been, because he seemed to see stars on the
desert itself.



"It's the oasis," said the camel driver.

"Well, why don't we go there right now?" the boy asked.

"Because we have to sleep."



The boy awoke as the sun rose. There, in front of him, where the small stars had been the night before,
was an endless row of date palms, stretching across the entire desert.

"We've done it!" said the Englishman, who had also awakened early.

But the boy was quiet. He was at home with the silence of the desert, and he was content just to look at
the trees. He still had a long way to go to reach the pyramids, and someday this morning would just be a
memory. But this was the present moment — the party the camel driver had mentioned — and he wanted
to live it as he did the lessons of his past and his dreams of the future. Although the vision of the date
palms would someday be just a memory, right now it signified shade, water, and a refuge from the war.
Yesterday, the camel's groan signaled danger, and now a row of date palms could herald a miracle.

The world speaks many languages, the boy thought.



The times rush past, and so do the caravans, thought the alchemist, as he watched the hundreds of
people and animals arriving at the oasis. People were shouting at the new arrivals, dust obscured the
desert sun, and the children of the oasis were bursting with excitement at the arrival of the strangers. The
alchemist saw the tribal chiefs greet the leader of the caravan, and converse with him at length.

But none of that mattered to the alchemist. He had already seen many people come and go, and the
desert remained as it was. He had seen kings and beggars walking the desert sands. The dunes were
changed constantly by the wind, yet these were the same sands he had known since he was a child. He
always enjoyed seeing the happiness that the travelers experienced when, after weeks of yellow sand and
blue sky, they first saw the green of the date palms. Maybe God created the desert so that man could
appreciate the date trees, he thought.

He decided to concentrate on more practical matters. He knew that in the caravan there was a man to
whom he was to teach some of his secrets. The omens had told him so. He didn't know the man yet, but
his practiced eye would recognize him when he appeared. He hoped that it would be someone as
capable as his previous apprentice.

I don't know why these things have to be transmitted by word of mouth, he thought. It wasn't exactly
that they were secrets; God revealed his secrets easily to all his creatures.

He had only one explanation for this fact: things have to be transmitted this way because they were made
up from the pure life, and this kind of life cannot be captured in pictures or words.

Because people become fascinated with pictures and words, and wind up forgetting the Language of the
World.



The boy couldn't believe what he was seeing: the oasis, rather than being just a well surrounded by a few
palm trees — as he had seen once in a geography book — was much larger than many towns back in
Spain. There were three hundred wells, fifty thousand date trees, and innumerable colored tents spread
among them.

"It looks ]ikeThe Thousand and One Nights ," said the Englishman, impatient to meet with the
alchemist.

They were surrounded by children, curious to look at the animals and people that were arriving. The
men of the oasis wanted to know if they had seen any fighting, and the women competed with one
another for access to the cloth and precious stones brought by the merchants. The silence of the desert
was a distant dream; the travelers in the caravan were talking incessantly, laughing and shouting, as if they
had emerged from the spiritual world and found themselves once again in the world of people. They were
relieved and happy.

They had been taking careful precautions in the desert, but the camel driver explained to the boy that
oases were always considered to be neutral territories, because the majority of the inhabitants were
women and children. There were oases throughout the desert, but the tribesmen fought in the desert,
leaving the oases as places of refuge.

With some difficulty, the leader of the caravan brought all his people together and gave them his
instructions. The group was to remain there at the oasis until the conflict between the tribes was over.
Since they were visitors, they would have to share living space with those who lived there, and would be
given the best accommodations. That was the law of hospitality. Then he asked that everyone, including
his own sentinels, hand over their arms to the men appointed by the tribal chieftains.

"Those are the rules of war," the leader explained. "The oases may not shelter armies or troops."

To the boy's surprise, the Englishman took a chrome-plated revolver out of his bag and gave it to the
men who were collecting the arms.

"Why a revolver?" he asked.

"It helped me to trust in people," the Englishman answered.

Meanwhile, the boy thought about his treasure. The closer he got to the realization of his dream, the
more difficult things became. It seemed as if what the old king had called "beginner's luck" were no longer
functioning. In his pursuit of the dream, he was being constantly subjected to tests of his persistence and
courage. So he could not be hasty, nor impatient. If he pushed forward impulsively, he would fail to see
the signs and omens left by God along his path.

God placed them along my path. He had surprised himself with the thought. Until then, he had
considered the omens to be things of this world. Like eating or sleeping, or like seeking love or finding a
job. He had never thought of them in terms of a language used by God to indicate what he should do.

"Don't be impatient," he repeated to himself. "It's like the camel driver said: Eat when it's time to eat.
And move along when it's time to move along.' "

That first day, everyone slept from exhaustion, including the Englishman. The boy was assigned a place



far from his friend, in a tent with five other young men of about his age. They were people of the desert,
and clamored to hear his stories about the great cities.

The boy told them about his life as a shepherd, and was about to tell them of his experiences at the
crystal shop when the Englishman came into the tent.

"I've been looking for you all morning," he said, as he led the boy outside. "I need you to help me find
out where the alchemist lives."

First, they tried to find him on their own. An alchemist would probably live in a manner that was different
from that of the rest of the people at the oasis, and it was likely that in his tent an oven was continuously
burning. They searched everywhere, and found that the oasis was much larger than they could have
imagined; there were hundreds of tents.

"We've wasted almost the entire day," said the Englishman, sitting down with the boy near one of the
wells.

"Maybe we'd better ask someone," the boy suggested.

The Englishman didn't want to tell others about his reasons for being at the oasis, and couldn't make up
his mind. But, finally, he agreed that the boy, who spoke better Arabic than he, should do so. The boy
approached a woman who had come to the well to fill a goatskin with water.

"Good afternoon, ma'am. I'm trying to find out where the alchemist lives here at the oasis."

The woman said she had never heard of such a person, and hurried away. But before she fled, she
advised the boy that he had better not try to converse with women who were dressed in black, because
they were married women. He should respect tradition.

The Englishman was disappointed. It seemed he had made the long journey for nothing. The boy was
also saddened; his friend was in pursuit of his destiny. And, when someone was in such pursuit, the entire
universe made an effort to help him succeed — that's what the old king had said. He couldn't have been
wrong.

"I had never heard of alchemists before," the boy said. "Maybe no one here has, either."

The Englishman's eyes lit up. "That's it! Maybe no one here knows what an alchemist is! Find out who it
is who cures the people's illnesses!"

Several women dressed in black came to the well for water, but the boy would speak to none of them,
despite the Englishman's insistence. Then a man approached.

"Do you know someone here who cures people's illnesses?" the boy asked.

"Allah cures our illnesses," said the man, clearly frightened of the strangers. "You're looking for witch
doctors." He spoke some verses from the Koran, and moved on.

Another man appeared. He was older, and was carrying a small bucket. The boy repeated his question.

"Why do you want to find that sort of person?" the Arab asked.



"Because my friend here has traveled for many months in order to meet with him," the boy said.

"If such a man is here at the oasis, he must be the very powerful one," said the old man after thinking for
a few moments. "Not even the tribal chieftains are able to see him when they want to. Only when he
consents.

"Wait for the end of the war. Then leave with the caravan. Don't try to enter into the life of the oasis," he
said, and walked away.

But the Englishman was exultant. They were on the right track.

Finally, a young woman approached who was not dressed in black. She had a vessel on her shoulder,
and her head was covered by a veil, but her face was uncovered. The boy approached her to ask about
the alchemist.

At that moment, it seemed to him that time stood still, and the Soul of the World surged within him.
When he looked into her dark eyes, and saw that her lips were poised between a laugh and silence, he
learned the most important part of the language that all the world spoke — the language that everyone on
earth was capable of understanding in their heart. It was love. Something older than humanity, more
ancient than the desert. Something that exerted the same force whenever two pairs of eyes met, as had
theirs here at the well. She smiled, and that was certainly an omen — the omen he had been awaiting,
without even knowing he was, for all his life. The omen he had sought to find with his sheep and in his
books, in the crystals and in the silence of the desert.

It was the pure Language of the World. It required no explanation, just as the universe needs none as it
travels through endless time. What the boy felt at that moment was that he was in the presence of the only
woman in his life, and that, with no need for words, she recognized the same thing. He was more certain
of it than of anything in the world. He had been told by his parents and grandparents that he must fall in
love and really know a person before becoming committed. But maybe people who felt that way had
never learned the universal language. Because, when you know that language, it's easy to understand that
someone in the world awaits you, whether it's in the middle of the desert or in some great city. And when
two such people encounter each other, and their eyes meet, the past and the future become unimportant.
There is only that moment, and the incredible certainty that everything under the sun has been written by
one hand only. It is the hand that evokes love, and creates a twin soul for every person in the world.
Without such love, one's dreams would have no meaning.

Maktub , thought the boy.

The Englishman shook the boy: "Come on, ask her!"

The boy stepped closer to the girl, and when she smiled, he did the same.

"What's your name?" he asked.

"Fatima," the girl said, averting her eyes.

"That's what some women in my country are called."



"It's the name of the Prophet's daughter," Fatima said. "The invaders carried the name everywhere." The
beautiful girl spoke of the invaders with pride.



The Englishman prodded him, and the boy asked her about the man who cured people's illnesses.

"That's the man who knows all the secrets of the world," she said. "He communicates with the genies of
the desert."

The genies were the spirits of good and evil. And the girl pointed to the south, indicating that it was there
the strange man lived. Then she filled her vessel with water and left.

The Englishman vanished, too, gone to find the alchemist. And the boy sat there by the well for a long
time, remembering that one day in Tarifa the levanter had brought to him the perfume of that woman, and
realizing that he had loved her before he even knew she existed. He knew that his love for her would
enable him to discover every treasure in the world.

The next day, the boy returned to the well, hoping to see the girl. To his surprise, the Englishman was
there, looking out at the desert,

"I waited all afternoon and evening," he said. "He appeared with the first stars of evening. I told him what
I was seeking, and he asked me if I had ever transformed lead into gold. I told him that was what I had
come here to learn.

"He told me I should try to do so. That's all he said: 'Go and try.' "

The boy didn't say anything. The poor Englishman had traveled all this way, only to be told that he
should repeat what he had already done so many times.

"So, then try," he said to the Englishman.

"That's what I'm going to do. I'm going to start now."

As the Englishman left, Fatima arrived and filled her vessel with water.

"I came to tell you just one thing," the boy said. "I want you to be my wife. I love you."

The girl dropped the container, and the water spilled.

"I'm going to wait here for you every day. I have crossed the desert in search of a treasure that is
somewhere near the Pyramids, and for me, the war seemed a curse. But now it's a blessing, because it
brought me to you."

"The war is going to end someday," the girl said.

The boy looked around him at the date palms. He reminded himself that he had been a shepherd, and
that he could be a shepherd again. Fatima was more important than his treasure.

"The tribesmen are always in search of treasure," the girl said, as if she had guessed what he was
thinking. "And the women of the desert are proud of their tribesmen."

She refilled her vessel and left.

The boy went to the well every day to meet with Fatima. He told her about his life as a shepherd, about
the king, and about the crystal shop. They became friends, and except for the fifteen minutes he spent



with her, each day seemed that it would never pass. When he had been at the oasis for almost a month,
the leader of the caravan called a meeting of all of the people traveling with him.

"We don't know when the war will end, so we can't continue our journey," he said. "The battles may last
for a long time, perhaps even years. There are powerful forces on both sides, and the war is important to
both armies. It's not a battle of good against evil. It's a war between forces that are fighting for the
balance of power, and, when that type of battle begins, it lasts longer than others — because Allah is on
both sides."

The people went back to where they were living, and the boy went to meet with Fatima that afternoon.
He told her about the morning's meeting. "The day after we met," Fatima said, "you told me that you
loved me. Then, you taught me something of the universal language and the Soul of the World. Because
of that, I have become a part of you."

The boy listened to the sound of her voice, and thought it to be more beautiful than the sound of the wind
in the date palms.

"I have been waiting for you here at this oasis for a long time. I have forgotten about my past, about my
traditions, and the way in which men of the desert expect women to behave. Ever since I was a child, I
have dreamed that the desert would bring me a wonderful present. Now, my present has arrived, and it's
you."

The boy wanted to take her hand. But Fatima's hands held to the handles of her jug.

"You have told me about your dreams, about the old king and your treasure. And you've told me about
omens. So now, I fear nothing, because it was those omens that brought you to me. And I am a part of
your dream, a part of your destiny, as you call it.

"That's why I want you to continue toward your goal. If you have to wait until the war is over, then wait.
But if you have to go before then, go on in pursuit of your dream. The dunes are changed by the wind,
but the desert never changes. That's the way it will be with our love for each other.

"Maktub ," she said. "If I am really a part of your dream, you'll come back one day."

The boy was sad as he left her that day. He thought of all the married shepherds he had known. They
had a difficult time convincing their wives that they had to go off into distant fields. Love required them to
stay with the people they loved.

He told Fatima that, at their next meeting.

"The desert takes our men from us, and they don't always return," she said. "We know that, and we are
used to it. Those who don't return become a part of the clouds, a part of the animals that hide in the
ravines and of the water that comes from the earth. They become a part of everything . . . they become the
Soul of the World.

"Some do come back. And then the other women are happy because they believe that their men may
one day return, as well. I used to look at those women and envy them their happiness. Now, I too will be
one of the women who wait.

"I'm a desert woman, and I'm proud of that. I want my husband to wander as free as the wind that
shapes the dunes. And, if I have to, I will accept the fact that he has become a part of the clouds, and the



animals and the water of the desert."

The boy went to look for the Englishman. He wanted to tell him about Fatima. He was surprised when
he saw that the Englishman had built himself a furnace outside his tent. It was a strange furnace, fueled by
firewood, with a transparent flask heating on top. As the Englishman stared out at the desert, his eyes
seemed brighter than they had when he was reading his books.

"This is the first phase of the job," he said. "I have to separate out the sulfur. To do that successfully, I
must have no fear of failure. It was my fear of failure that first kept me from attempting the Master Work.
Now, I'm beginning what I could have started ten years ago. But I'm happy at least that I didn't wait
twenty years."

He continued to feed the fire, and the boy stayed on until the desert turned pink in the setting sun. He felt
the urge to go out into the desert, to see if its silence held the answers to his questions.

He wandered for a while, keeping the date palms of the oasis within sight. He listened to the wind, and
felt the stones beneath his feet. Here and there, he found a shell, and realized that the desert, in remote
times, had been a sea. He sat on a stone, and allowed himself to become hypnotized by the horizon. He
tried to deal with the concept of love as distinct from possession, and couldn't separate them. But Fatima
was a woman of the desert, and, if anything could help him to understand, it was the desert.

As he sat there thinking, he sensed movement above him. Looking up, he saw a pair of hawks flying high
in the sky.

He watched the hawks as they drifted on the wind. Although their flight appeared to have no pattern, it
made a certain kind of sense to the boy. It was just that he couldn't grasp what it meant. He followed the
movement of the birds, trying to read something into it. Maybe these desert birds could explain to him the
meaning of love without ownership.

He felt sleepy. In his heart, he wanted to remain awake, but he also wanted to sleep. "I am learning the
Language of the World, and everything in the world is beginning to make sense to me. . . even the flight of
the hawks," he said to himself. And, in that mood, he was grateful to be in love. When you are in love,
things make even more sense, he thought.

Suddenly, one of the hawks made a flashing dive through the sky, attacking the other. As it did so, a
sudden, fleeting image came to the boy: an army, with its swords at the ready, riding into the oasis. The
vision vanished immediately, but it had shaken him. He had heard people speak of mirages, and had
already seen some himself: they were desires that, because of their intensity, materialized over the sands
of the desert. But he certainly didn't desire that an army invade the oasis.

He wanted to forget about the vision, and return to his meditation. He tried again to concentrate on the
pink shades of the desert, and its stones. But there was something there in his heart that wouldn't allow
him to do so.

"Always heed the omens," the old king had said. The boy recalled what he had seen in the vision, and
sensed that it was actually going to occur.

He rose, and made his way back toward the palm trees. Once again, he perceived the many languages
in the things about him: this time, the desert was safe, and it was the oasis that had become dangerous.

The camel driver was seated at the base of a palm tree, observing the sunset. He saw the boy appear



from the other side of the dunes.

"An army is coming," the boy said. "I had a vision."

"The desert fills men's hearts with visions," the camel driver answered.

But the boy told him about the hawks: that he had been watching their flight and had suddenly felt himself
to have plunged to the Soul of the World.

The camel driver understood what the boy was saying. He knew that any given thing on the face of the
earth could reveal the history of all things. One could open a book to any page, or look at a person's
hand; one could turn a card, or watch the flight of the birds. . . whatever the thing observed, one could
find a connection with his experience of the moment. Actually, it wasn't that those things, in themselves,
revealed anything at all; it was just that people, looking at what was occurring around them, could find a
means of penetration to the Soul of the World.

The desert was full of men who earned their living based on the ease with which they could penetrate to
the Soul of the World. They were known as seers, and they were held in fear by women and the elderly.
Tribesmen were also wary of consulting them, because it would be impossible to be effective in battle if
one knew that he was fated to die. The tribesmen preferred the taste of battle, and the thrill of not
knowing what the outcome would be; the future was already written by Allah, and what he had written
was always for the good of man. So the tribesmen lived only for the present, because the present was full
of surprises, and they had to be aware of many things: Where was the enemy's sword? Where was his
horse? What kind of blow should one deliver next in order to remain alive? The camel driver was not a
fighter, and he had consulted with seers. Many of them had been right about what they said, while some
had been wrong. Then, one day, the oldest seer he had ever sought out (and the one most to be feared)
had asked why the camel driver was so interested in the future.

"Well. . . so I can do things," he had responded. "And so I can change those things that I don't want to
happen."

"But then they wouldn't be a part of your future," the seer had said.

"Well, maybe I just want to know the future so I can prepare myself for what's coming."

"If good things are coming, they will be a pleasant surprise," said the seer. "If bad things are, and you
know in advance, you will suffer greatly before they even occur."

"I want to know about the future because I'm a man," the camel driver had said to the seer. "And men
always live their lives based on the future."

The seer was a specialist in the casting of twigs; he threw them on the ground, and made interpretations
based on how they fell. That day, he didn't make a cast. He wrapped the twigs in a piece of cloth and put
them back in his bag.

"I make my living forecasting the future for people," he said. "I know the science of the twigs, and I
know how to use them to penetrate to the place where all is written. There, I can read the past, discover
what has already been forgotten, and understand the omens that are here in the present.

"When people consult me, it's not that I'm reading the future; I am guessing at the future. The future
belongs to God, and it is only he who reveals it, under extraordinary circumstances. How do I guess at



the future? Based on the omens of the present. The secret is here in the present. If you pay attention to
the present, you can improve upon it. And, if you improve on the present, what comes later will also be
better. Forget about the future, and live each day according to the teachings, confident that God loves his
children. Each day, in itself, brings with it an eternity."

The camel driver had asked what the circumstances were under which God would allow him to see the
future.

"Only when he, himself, reveals it. And God only rarely reveals the future. When he does so, it is for only
one reason: it's a future that was written so as to be altered."

God had shown the boy a part of the future, the camel driver thought. Why was it that he wanted the
boy to serve as his instrument?

"Go and speak to the tribal chieftains," said the camel driver. "Tell them about the armies that are
approaching."



"They'll laugh at me."

"They are men of the desert, and the men of the desert are used to dealing with omens."

"Well, then, they probably already know."



"They're not concerned with that right now. They believe that if they have to know about something
Allah wants them to know, someone will tell them about it. It has happened many times before. But, this
time, the person is you."

The boy thought of Fatima. And he decided he would go to see the chiefs of the tribes.



The boy approached the guard at the front of the huge white tent at the center of the oasis.

"I want to see the chieftains. I've brought omens from the desert."

Without responding, the guard entered the tent, where he remained for some time. When he emerged, it
was with a young Arab, dressed in white and gold. The boy told the younger man what he had seen, and
the man asked him to wait there. He disappeared into the tent.

Night fell, and an assortment of fighting men and merchants entered and exited the tent. One by one, the
campfires were extinguished, and the oasis fell as quiet as the desert. Only the lights in the great tent
remained. During all this time, the boy thought about Fatima, and he was still unable to understand his last
conversation with her.

Finally, after hours of waiting, the guard bade the boy enter. The boy was astonished by what he saw
inside. Never could he have imagined that, there in the middle of the desert, there existed a tent like this
one. The ground was covered with the most beautiful carpets he had ever walked upon, and from the top
of the structure hung lamps of hand- wrought gold, each with a lighted candle. The tribal chieftains were
seated at the back of the tent in a semicircle, resting upon richly embroidered silk cushions. Servants
came and went with silver trays laden with spices and tea. Other servants maintained the fires in the
hookahs. The atmosphere was suffused with the sweet scent of smoke.



There were eight chieftains, but the boy could see immediately which of them was the most important: an
Arab dressed in white and gold, seated at the center of the semicircle. At his side was the young Arab
the boy had spoken with earlier.

"Who is this stranger who speaks of omens?" asked one of the chieftains, eyeing the boy.

"It is I," the boy answered. And he told what he had seen.



"Why would the desert reveal such things to a stranger, when it knows that we have been here for
generations?" said another of the chieftains.

"Because my eyes are not yet accustomed to the desert," the boy said. "I can see things that eyes
habituated to the desert might not see."

And also because I know about the Soul of the World, he thought to himself.

"The oasis is neutral ground. No one attacks an oasis," said a third chieftain.

"I can only tell you what I saw. If you don't want to believe me, you don't have to do anything about it."

The men fell into an animated discussion. They spoke in an Arabic dialect that the boy didn't understand,
but, when he made to leave, the guard told him to stay. The boy became fearful; the omens told him that
something was wrong. He regretted having spoken to the camel driver about what he had seen in the
desert.

Suddenly, the elder at the center smiled almost imperceptibly, and the boy felt better. The man hadn't
participated in the discussion, and, in fact, hadn't said a word up to that point. But the boy was already
used to the Language of the World, and he could feel the vibrations of peace throughout the tent. Now
his intuition was that he had been right in coming.

The discussion ended. The chieftains were silent for a few moments as they listened to what the old man
was saying. Then he turned to the boy: this time his expression was cold and distant.

"Two thousand years ago, in a distant land, a man who believed in dreams was thrown into a dungeon
and then sold as a slave," the old man said, now in the dialect the boy understood. "Our merchants
bought that man, and brought him to Egypt. All of us know that whoever believes in dreams also knows
how to interpret them."

The elder continued, "When the pharaoh dreamed of cows that were thin and cows that were fat, this
man I'm speaking of rescued Egypt from famine. His name was Joseph. He, too, was a stranger in a
strange land, like you, and he was probably about your age."

He paused, and his eyes were still unfriendly.

"We always observe the Tradition. The Tradition saved Egypt from famine in those days, and made the
Egyptians the wealthiest of peoples. The Tradition teaches men how to cross the desert, and how their
children should marry. The Tradition says that an oasis is neutral territory, because both sides have oases,
and so both are vulnerable."

No one said a word as the old man continued.



"But the Tradition also says that we should believe the messages of the desert. Everything we know was
taught to us by the desert."

The old man gave a signal, and everyone stood. The meeting was over. The hookahs were extinguished,
and the guards stood at attention. The boy made ready to leave, but the old man spoke again:

"Tomorrow, we are going to break the agreement that says that no one at the oasis may carry arms.
Throughout the entire day we will be on the lookout for our enemies. When the sun sets, the men will
once again surrender their arms to me. For every ten dead men among our enemies, you will receive a
piece of gold.

"But arms cannot be drawn unless they also go into battle. Arms are as capricious as the desert, and, if
they are not used, the next time they might not function. If at least one of them hasn't been used by the
end of the day tomorrow, one will be used on you."

When the boy left the tent, the oasis was illuminated only by the light of the full moon. He was twenty
minutes from his tent, and began to make his way there.

He was alarmed by what had happened. He had succeeded in reaching through to the Soul of the
World, and now the price for having done so might be his life. It was a frightening bet. But he had been
making risky bets ever since the day he had sold his sheep to pursue his destiny. And, as the camel driver
had said, to die tomorrow was no worse than dying on any other day. Every day was there to be lived or
to mark one's departure from this world. Everything depended on one word: "Maktub"

Walking along in the silence, he had no regrets. If he died tomorrow, it would be because God was not
willing to change the future. He would at least have died after having crossed the strait, after having
worked in a crystal shop, and after having known the silence of the desert and Fatima's eyes. He had
lived every one of his days intensely since he had left home so long ago. If he died tomorrow, he would
already have seen more than other shepherds, and he was proud of that.

Suddenly he heard a thundering sound, and he was thrown to the ground by a wind such as he had never
known. The area was swirling in dust so intense that it hid the moon from view. Before him was an
enormous white horse, rearing over him with a frightening scream.

When the blinding dust had settled a bit, the boy trembled at what he saw. Astride the animal was a
horseman dressed completely in black, with a falcon perched on his left shoulder. He wore a turban and
his entire face, except for his eyes, was covered with a black kerchief. He appeared to be a messenger
from the desert, but his presence was much more powerful than that of a mere messenger.

The strange horseman drew an enormous, curved sword from a scabbard mounted on his saddle. The
steel of its blade glittered in the light of the moon.

"Who dares to read the meaning of the flight of the hawks?" he demanded, so loudly that his words
seemed to echo through the fifty thousand palm trees of Al-Fayoum.

"It is I who dared to do so," said the boy. He was reminded of the image of Santiago Matamoros,
mounted on his white horse, with the infidels beneath his hooves. This man looked exactly the same,
except that now the roles were reversed.

"It is I who dared to do so," he repeated, and he lowered his head to receive a blow from the sword.



"Many lives will be saved, because I was able to see through to the Soul of the World."

The sword didn't fall. Instead, the stranger lowered it slowly, until the point touched the boy's forehead.
It drew a droplet of blood.

The horseman was completely immobile, as was the boy. It didn't even occur to the boy to flee. In his
heart, he felt a strange sense of joy: he was about to die in pursuit of his destiny. And for Fatima. The
omens had been true, after all. Here he was, face-to-face with his enemy, but there was no need to be
concerned about dying — the Soul of the World awaited him, and he would soon be a part of it. And,
tomorrow, his enemy would also be apart of that Soul.

The stranger continued to hold the sword at the boy's forehead. "Why did you read the flight of the
birds?"

"I read only what the birds wanted to tell me. They wanted to save the oasis. Tomorrow all of you will
die, because there are more men at the oasis than you have."

The sword remained where it was. "Who are you to change what Allah has willed?"

"Allah created the armies, and he also created the hawks. Allah taught me the language of the birds.
Everything has been written by the same hand," the boy said, remembering the camel driver's words.

The stranger withdrew the sword from the boy's forehead, and the boy felt immensely relieved. But he
still couldn't flee.

"Be careful with your prognostications," said the stranger. "When something is written, there is no way to
change it."

"All I saw was an army," said the boy. "I didn't see the outcome of the battle."

The stranger seemed satisfied with the answer. But he kept the sword in his hand. "What is a stranger
doing in a strange land?"

"I am following my destiny. It's not something you would understand."

The stranger placed his sword in its scabbard, and the boy relaxed.

"I had to test your courage," the stranger said. "Courage is the quality most essential to understanding the
Language of the World."

The boy was surprised. The stranger was speaking of things that very few people knew about.

"You must not let up, even after having come so far," he continued. "You must love the desert, but never
trust it completely. Because the desert tests all men: it challenges every step, and kills those who become
distracted."

What he said reminded the boy of the old king.

"If the warriors come here, and your head is still on your shoulders at sunset, come and find me," said
the stranger.



The same hand that had brandished the sword now held a whip. The horse reared again, raising a cloud
of dust.

"Where do you live?" shouted the boy, as the horseman rode away.

The hand with the whip pointed to the south.

The boy had met the alchemist.



Next morning, there were two thousand armed men scattered throughout the palm trees at Al-Fayoum.
Before the sun had reached its high point, five hundred tribesmen appeared on the horizon. The mounted
troops entered the oasis from the north; it appeared to be a peaceful expedition, but they all carried arms
hidden in their robes. When they reached the white tent at the center of Al-Fayoum, they withdrew their
scimitars and rifles. And they attacked an empty tent.

The men of the oasis surrounded the horsemen from the desert and within half an hour all but one of the
intruders were dead. The children had been kept at the other side of a grove of palm trees, and saw
nothing of what had happened. The women had remained in their tents, praying for the safekeeping of
their husbands, and saw nothing of the battle, either. Were it not for the bodies there on the ground, it
would have appeared to be a normal day at the oasis.

The only tribesman spared was the commander of the battalion. That afternoon, he was brought before
the tribal chieftains, who asked him why he had violated the Tradition. The commander said that his men
had been starving and thirsty, exhausted from many days of battle, and had decided to take the oasis so
as to be able to return to the war.

The tribal chieftain said that he felt sorry for the tribesmen, but that the Tradition was sacred. He
condemned the commander to death without honor. Rather than being killed by a blade or a bullet, he
was hanged from a dead palm tree, where his body twisted in the desert wind.

The tribal chieftain called for the boy, and presented him with fifty pieces of gold. He repeated his story
about Joseph of Egypt, and asked the boy to become the counselor of the oasis.



When the sun had set, and the first stars made their appearance, the boy started to walk to the south. He
eventually sighted a single tent, and a group of Arabs passing by told the boy that it was a place inhabited
by genies. But the boy sat down and waited.

Not until the moon was high did the alchemist ride into view. He carried two dead hawks over his
shoulder.

"I am here," the boy said.

"You shouldn't be here," the alchemist answered. "Or is it your destiny that brings you here?"

"With the wars between the tribes, it's impossible to cross the desert. So I have come here."

The alchemist dismounted from his horse, and signaled that the boy should enter the tent with him. It was



a tent like many at the oasis. The boy looked around for the ovens and other apparatus used in alchemy,
but saw none. There were only some books in a pile, a small cooking stove, and the carpets, covered
with mysterious designs.

"Sit down. We'll have something to drink and eat these hawks," said the alchemist.

The boy suspected that they were the same hawks he had seen on the day before, but he said nothing.
The alchemist lighted the fire, and soon a delicious aroma filled the tent. It was better than the scent of the
hookahs.

"Why did you want to see me?" the boy asked.

"Because of the omens," the alchemist answered. "The wind told me you would be coming, and that you
would need help."

"It's not I the wind spoke about. It's the other foreigner, the Englishman. He's the one that's looking for
you."

"He has other things to do first. But he's on the right track. He has begun to try to understand the
desert."

"And what about me?"

"When a person really desires something, all the universe conspires to help that person to realize his
dream," said the alchemist, echoing the words of the old king. The boy understood. Another person was
there to help him toward his destiny.

"So you are going to instruct me?"

"No. You already know all you need to know. I am only going to point you in the direction of your
treasure."

"But there's a tribal war," the boy reiterated.

"I know what's happening in the desert."

"I have already found my treasure. I have a camel, I have my money from the crystal shop, and I have
fifty gold pieces. In my own country, I would be a rich man."

"But none of that is from the Pyramids," said the alchemist.

"I also have Fatima. She is a treasure greater than anything else I have won."

"She wasn't found at the Pyramids, either."

They ate in silence. The alchemist opened a bottle and poured a red liquid into the boy's cup. It was the
most delicious wine he had ever tasted.

"Isn't wine prohibited here?" the boy asked

"It's not what enters men's mouths that's evil," said the alchemist. "It's what comes out of their mouths



that is."

The alchemist was a bit daunting, but, as the boy drank the wine, he relaxed. After they finished eating
they sat outside the tent, under a moon so brilliant that it made the stars pale.

"Drink and enjoy yourself," said the alchemist, noticing that the boy was feeling happier. "Rest well
tonight, as if you were a warrior preparing for combat. Remember that wherever your heart is, there you
will find your treasure. You've got to find the treasure, so that everything you have learned along the way
can make sense.

"Tomorrow, sell your camel and buy a horse. Camels are traitorous: they walk thousands of paces and
never seem to tire. Then suddenly, they kneel and die. But horses tire bit by bit. You always know how
much you can ask of them, and when it is that they are about to die."



The following night, the boy appeared at the alchemist's tent with a horse. The alchemist was ready, and
he mounted his own steed and placed the falcon on his left shoulder. He said to the boy, "Show me
where there is life out in the desert. Only those who can see such signs of life are able to find treasure."

They began to ride out over the sands, with the moon lighting their way. I don't know if I'll be able to
find life in the desert, the boy thought. I don't know the desert that well yet.

He wanted to say so to the alchemist, but he was afraid of the man. They reached the rocky place where
the boy had seen the hawks in the sky, but now there was only silence and the wind.

"I don't know how to find life in the desert," the boy said. "I know that there is life here, but I don't know
where to look."

"Life attracts life," the alchemist answered.

And then the boy understood. He loosened the reins on his horse, who galloped forward over the rocks
and sand. The alchemist followed as the boy's horse ran for almost half an hour. They could no longer
see the palms of the oasis — only the gigantic moon above them, and its silver reflections from the stones
of the desert. Suddenly, for no apparent reason, the boy's horse began to slow.

"There's life here," the boy said to the alchemist. "I don't know the language of the desert, but my horse
knows the language of life."

They dismounted, and the alchemist said nothing. Advancing slowly, they searched among the stones.
The alchemist stopped abruptly, and bent to the ground. There was a hole there among the stones. The
alchemist put his hand into the hole, and then his entire arm, up to his shoulder. Something was moving
there, and the alchemist's eyes — the boy could see only his eyes-squinted with his effort. His arm seemed
to be battling with whatever was in the hole. Then, with a motion that startled the boy, he withdrew his
arm and leaped to his feet. In his hand, he grasped a snake by the tail.

The boy leapt as well, but away from the alchemist. The snake fought frantically, making hissing sounds
that shattered the silence of the desert. It was a cobra, whose venom could kill a person in minutes.

"Watch out for his venom," the boy said. But even though the alchemist had put his hand in the hole, and
had surely already been bitten, his expression was calm. "The alchemist is two hundred years old," the



Englishman had told him. He must know how to deal with the snakes of the desert.

The boy watched as his companion went to his horse and withdrew a scimitar. With its blade, he drew a
circle in the sand, and then he placed the snake within it. The serpent relaxed immediately.

"Not to worry," said the alchemist. "He won't leave the circle. You found life in the desert, the omen that
I needed."

"Why was that so important?"

"Because the Pyramids are surrounded by the desert."

The boy didn't want to talk about the Pyramids. His heart was heavy, and he had been melancholy since
the previous night. To continue his search for the treasure meant that he had to abandon Fatima.

"I'm going to guide you across the desert," the alchemist said.

"I want to stay at the oasis," the boy answered. "I've found Fatima, and, as far as I'm concerned, she's
worth more than treasure."

"Fatima is a woman of the desert," said the alchemist. "She knows that men have to go away in order to
return. And she already has her treasure: it's you. Now she expects that you will find what it is you're
looking for."

"Well, what if I decide to stay?"

"Let me tell you what will happen. You'll be the counselor of the oasis. You have enough gold to buy
many sheep and many camels. You'll marry Fatima, and you'll both be happy for a year. You'll learn to
love the desert, and you'll get to know every one of the fifty thousand palms. You'll watch them as they
grow, demonstrating how the world is always changing. And you'll get better and better at understanding
omens, because the desert is the best teacher there is.

"Sometime during the second year, you'll remember about the treasure. The omens will begin insistently
to speak of it, and you'll try to ignore them. You'll use your knowledge for the welfare of the oasis and its
inhabitants. The tribal chieftains will appreciate what you do. And your camels will bring you wealth and
power.

"During the third year, the omens will continue to speak of your treasure and your destiny. You'll walk
around, night after night, at the oasis, and Fatima will be unhappy because she'll feel it was she who
interrupted your quest. But you will love her, and she'll return your love. You'll remember that she never
asked you to stay, because a woman of the desert knows that she must await her man. So you won't
blame her. But many times you'll walk the sands of the desert, thinking that maybe you could have left. . .
that you could have trusted more in your love for Fatima. Because what kept you at the oasis was your
own fear that you might never come back. At that point, the omens will tell you that your treasure is
buried forever.

"Then, sometime during the fourth year, the omens will abandon you, because you've stopped listening to
them. The tribal chieftains will see that, and you'll be dismissed from your position as counselor. But, by
then, you'll be a rich merchant, with many camels and a great deal of merchandise. You'll spend the rest
of your days knowing that you didn't pursue your destiny, and that now it's too late.



"You must understand that love never keeps a man from pursuing his destiny. If he abandons that
pursuit, it's because it wasn't true love. . . the love that speaks the Language of the World."

The alchemist erased the circle in the sand, and the snake slithered away among the rocks. The boy
remembered the crystal merchant who had always wanted to go to Mecca, and the Englishman in search
of the alchemist. He thought of the woman who had trusted in the desert. And he looked out over the
desert that had brought him to the woman he loved.

They mounted their horses, and this time it was the boy who followed the alchemist back to the oasis.
The wind brought the sounds of the oasis to them, and the boy tried to hear Fatima's voice.

But that night, as he had watched the cobra within the circle, the strange horseman with the falcon on his
shoulder had spoken of love and treasure, of the women of the desert and of his destiny.

"I'm going with you," the boy said. And he immediately felt peace in his heart.

"We'll leave tomorrow before sunrise," was the alchemist's only response.



The boy spent a sleepless night. Two hours before dawn, he awoke one of the boys who slept in his
tent, and asked him to show him where Fatima lived. They went to her tent, and the boy gave his friend
enough gold to buy a sheep.

Then he asked his friend to go to into the tent where Fatima was sleeping, and to awaken her and tell her
that he was waiting outside. The young Arab did as he was asked, and was given enough gold to buy yet
another sheep.

"Now leave us alone," said the boy to the young Arab. The Arab returned to his tent to sleep, proud to
have helped the counselor of the oasis, and happy at having enough money to buy himself some sheep.

Fatima appeared at the entrance to the tent. The two walked out among the palms. The boy knew that it
was a violation of the Tradition, but that didn't matter to him now.

"I'm going away," he said. "And I want you to know that I'm coming back. I love you because. . . "

"Don't say anything," Fatima interrupted. "One is loved because one is loved. No reason is needed for
loving."

But the boy continued, "I had a dream, and I met with a king. I sold crystal and crossed the desert. And,
because the tribes declared war, I went to the well, seeking the alchemist. So, I love you because the
entire universe conspired to help me find you."

The two embraced. It was the first time either had touched the other.

"I'll be back," the boy said.

"Before this, I always looked to the desert with longing," said Fatima. "Now it will be with hope. My
father went away one day, but he returned to my mother, and he has always come back since then."

They said nothing else. They walked a bit farther among the palms, and then the boy left her at the



entrance to her tent.

"I'll return, just as your father came back to your mother," he said.

He saw that Fatima's eyes were filled with tears.

"You're crying?"

"I'm a woman of the desert," she said, averting her face. "But above all, I'm a woman."

Fatima went back to her tent, and, when daylight came, she went out to do the chores she had done for
years. But everything had changed. The boy was no longer at the oasis, and the oasis would never again
have the same meaning it had had only yesterday. It would no longer be a place with fifty thousand palm
trees and three hundred wells, where the pilgrims arrived, relieved at the end of their long journeys. From
that day on, the oasis would be an empty place for her.

From that day on, it was the desert that would be important. She would look to it every day, and would
try to guess which star the boy was following in search of his treasure. She would have to send her kisses
on the wind, hoping that the wind would touch the boy's face, and would tell him that she was alive. That
she was waiting for him, a woman awaiting a courageous man in search of his treasure. From that day on,
the desert would represent only one thing to her: the hope for his return.



"Don't think about what you've left behind," the alchemist said to the boy as they began to ride across
the sands of the desert. "Everything is written in the Soul of the World, and there it will stay forever."

"Men dream more about coming home than about leaving," the boy said. He was already reaccustomed
to desert's silence.

"If what one finds is made of pure matter, it will never spoil. And one can always come back. If what
you had found was only a moment of light, like the explosion of a star, you would find nothing on your
return."

The man was speaking the language of alchemy. But the boy knew that he was referring to Fatima.

It was difficult not to think about what he had left behind. The desert, with its endless monotony, put him
to dreaming. The boy could still see the palm trees, the wells, and the face of the woman he loved. He
could see the Englishman at his experiments, and the camel driver who was a teacher without realizing it.
Maybe the alchemist has never been in love, the boy thought.

The alchemist rode in front, with the falcon on his shoulder. The bird knew the language of the desert
well, and whenever they stopped, he flew off in search of game. On the first day he returned with a
rabbit, and on the second with two birds.

At night, they spread their sleeping gear and kept their fires hidden. The desert nights were cold, and
were becoming darker and darker as the phases of the moon passed. They went on for a week,
speaking only of the precautions they needed to follow in order to avoid the battles between the tribes.
The war continued, and at times the wind carried the sweet, sickly smell of blood. Battles had been
fought nearby, and the wind reminded the boy that there was the language of omens, always ready to
show him what his eyes had failed to observe.



On the seventh day, the alchemist decided to make camp earlier than usual. The falcon flew off to find
game, and the alchemist offered his water container to the boy.

"You are almost at the end of your journey," said the alchemist. "I congratulate you for having pursued
your destiny."

"And you've told me nothing along the way," said the boy. "I thought you were going to teach me some
of the things you know. A while ago, I rode through the desert with a man who had books on alchemy.
But I wasn't able to learn anything from them."

"There is only one way to learn," the alchemist answered. "It's through action. Everything you need to
know you have learned through your journey. You need to learn only one thing more."

The boy wanted to know what that was, but the alchemist was searching the horizon, looking for the
falcon.

"Why are you called the alchemist?"

"Because that's what I am."

"And what went wrong when other alchemists tried to make gold and were unable to do so?"

"They were looking only for gold," his companion answered. "They were seeking the treasure of their
destiny, without wanting actually to live out the destiny."

"What is it that I still need to know?" the boy asked.

But the alchemist continued to look to the horizon. And finally the falcon returned with their meal. They
dug a hole and lit their fire in it, so that the light of the flames would not be seen.

"I'm an alchemist simply because I'm an alchemist," he said, as he prepared the meal. "I learned the
science from my grandfather, who learned from his father, and so on, back to the creation of the world.
In those times, the Master Work could be written simply on an emerald. But men began to reject simple
things, and to write tracts, interpretations, and philosophical studies. They also began to feel that they
knew a better way than others had. Yet the Emerald Tablet is still alive today."

"What was written on the Emerald Tablet?" the boy wanted to know.

The alchemist began to draw in the sand, and completed his drawing in less than five minutes. As he
drew, the boy thought of the old king, and the plaza where they had met that day; it seemed as if it had
taken place years and years ago.

"This is what was written on the Emerald Tablet," said the alchemist, when he had finished.

The boy tried to read what was written in the sand.

"It's a code," said the boy, a bit disappointed. "It looks like what I saw in the Englishman's books."

"No," the alchemist answered. "It's like the flight of those two hawks; it can't be understood by reason
alone. The Emerald Tablet is a direct passage to the Soul of the World.



"The wise men understood that this natural world is only an image and a copy of paradise. The existence
of this world is simply a guarantee that there exists a world that is perfect. God created the world so that,
through its visible objects, men could understand his spiritual teachings and the marvels of his wisdom.
That's what I mean by action."

"Should I understand the Emerald Tablet?" the boy asked.

"Perhaps, if you were in a laboratory of alchemy, this would be the right time to study the best way to
understand the Emerald Tablet. But you are in the desert. So immerse yourself in it. The desert will give
you an understanding of the world; in fact, anything on the face of the earth will do that. You don't even
have to understand the desert: all you have to do is contemplate a simple grain of sand, and you will see
in it all the marvels of creation."

"How do I immerse myself in the desert?"

"Listen to your heart. It knows all things, because it came from the Soul of the World, and it will one day
return there."



They crossed the desert for another two days in silence. The alchemist had become much more cautious,
because they were approaching the area where the most violent battles were being waged. As they
moved along, the boy tried to listen to his heart.

It was not easy to do; in earlier times, his heart had always been ready to tell its story, but lately that
wasn't true. There had been times when his heart spent hours telling of its sadness, and at other times it
became so emotional over the desert sunrise that the boy had to hide his tears. His heart beat fastest
when it spoke to the boy of treasure, and more slowly when the boy stared entranced at the endless
horizons of the desert. But his heart was never quiet, even when the boy and the alchemist had fallen into
silence.

"Why do we have to listen to our hearts?" the boy asked, when they had made camp that day.

"Because, wherever your heart is, that is where you'll find your treasure."

"But my heart is agitated," the boy said. "It has its dreams, it gets emotional, and it's become passionate
over a woman of the desert. It asks things of me, and it keeps me from sleeping many nights, when I'm
thinking about her."

"Well, that's good. Your heart is alive. Keep listening to what it has to say."

During the next three days, the two travelers passed by a number of armed tribesmen, and saw others
on the horizon. The boy's heart began to speak of fear. It told him stories it had heard from the Soul of
the World, stories of men who sought to find their treasure and never succeeded. Sometimes it frightened
the boy with the idea that he might not find his treasure, or that he might die there in the desert. At other
times, it told the boy that it was satisfied: it had found love and riches.

"My heart is a traitor," the boy said to the alchemist, when they had paused to rest the horses. "It doesn't
want me to go on."



"That makes sense," the alchemist answered. "Naturally it's afraid that, in pursuing your dream, you might
lose everything you've won."

"Well, then, why should I listen to my heart?"

"Because you will never again be able to keep it quiet. Even if you pretend not to have heard what it tells
you, it will always be there inside you, repeating to you what you're thinking about life and about the
world."

"You mean I should listen, even if it's treasonous?"

"Treason is a blow that comes unexpectedly. If you know your heart well, it will never be able to do that
to you. Because you'll know its dreams and wishes, and will know how to deal with them.

"You will never be able to escape from your heart. So it's better to listen to what it has to say. That way,
you'll never have to fear an unanticipated blow."

The boy continued to listen to his heart as they crossed the desert. He came to understand its dodges
and tricks, and to accept it as it was. He lost his fear, and forgot about his need to go back to the oasis,
because, one afternoon, his heart told him that it was happy. "Even though I complain sometimes," it said,
"it's because I'm the heart of a person, and people's hearts are that way. People are afraid to pursue their
most important dreams, because they feel that they don't deserve them, or that they'll be unable to
achieve them. We, their hearts, become fearful just thinking of loved ones who go away forever, or of
moments that could have been good but weren't, or of treasures that might have been found but were
forever hidden in the sands. Because, when these things happen, we suffer terribly."

"My heart is afraid that it will have to suffer," the boy told the alchemist one night as they looked up at
the moonless sky.

"Tell your heart that the fear of suffering is worse than the suffering itself. And that no heart has ever
suffered when it goes in search of its dreams, because every second of the search is a second's encounter
with God and with eternity."

"Every second of the search is an encounter with God," the boy told his heart. "When I have been truly
searching for my treasure, every day has been luminous, because I've known that every hour was a part
of the dream that I would find it. When I have been truly searching for my treasure, I've discovered things
along the way that I never would have seen had I not had the courage to try things that seemed
impossible for a shepherd to achieve."

So his heart was quiet for an entire afternoon. That night, the boy slept deeply, and, when he awoke, his
heart began to tell him things that came from the Soul of the World. It said that all people who are happy
have God within them. And that happiness could be found in a grain of sand from the desert, as the
alchemist had said. Because a grain of sand is a moment of creation, and the universe has taken millions
of years to create it. "Everyone on earth has a treasure that awaits him," his heart said. "We, people's
hearts, seldom say much about those treasures, because people no longer want to go in search of them.
We speak of them only to children. Later, we simply let life proceed, in its own direction, toward its own
fate. But, unfortunately, very few follow the path laid out for them — the path to their destinies, and to
happiness. Most people see the world as a threatening place, and, because they do, the world turns out,
indeed, to be a threatening place.

"So, we, their hearts, speak more and more softly. We never stop speaking out, but we begin to hope



that our words won't be heard: we don't want people to suffer because they don't follow their hearts."

"Why don't people's hearts tell them to continue to follow their dreams?" the boy asked the alchemist.

"Because that's what makes a heart suffer most, and hearts don't like to suffer."

From then on, the boy understood his heart. He asked it, please, never to stop speaking to him. He
asked that, when he wandered far from his dreams, his heart press him and sound the alarm. The boy
swore that, every time he heard the alarm, he would heed its message.

That night, he told all of this to the alchemist. And the alchemist understood that the boy's heart had
returned to the Soul of the World.

"So what should I do now?" the boy asked.

"Continue in the direction of the Pyramids," said the alchemist. "And continue to pay heed to the omens.
Your heart is still capable of showing you where the treasure is."

"Is that the one thing I still needed to know?"



"No," the alchemist answered. "What you still need to know is this: before a dream is realized, the Soul
of the World tests everything that was learned along the way. It does this not because it is evil, but so that
we can, in addition to realizing our dreams, master the lessons we've learned as we've moved toward that
dream. That's the point at which most people give up. It's the point at which, as we say in the language of
the desert, one 'dies of thirst just when the palm trees have appeared on the horizon.'

"Every search begins with beginner's luck. And every search ends with the victor's being severely
tested."

The boy remembered an old proverb from his country. It said that the darkest hour of the night came
just before the dawn.



On the following day, the first clear sign of danger appeared. Three armed tribesmen approached, and
asked what the boy and the alchemist were doing there.

'Tm hunting with my falcon," the alchemist answered.

"We're going to have to search you to see whether you're armed," one of the tribesmen said.

The alchemist dismounted slowly, and the boy did the same.

"Why are you carrying money?" asked the tribesman, when he had searched the boy's bag.

"I need it to get to the Pyramids," he said.

The tribesman who was searching the alchemist's belongings found a small crystal flask filled with a
liquid, and a yellow glass egg that was slightly larger than a chicken's egg.

"What are these things?" he asked.



"That's the Philosopher's Stone and the Elixir of Life. It's the Master Work of the alchemists. Whoever
swallows that elixir will never be sick again, and a fragment from that stone turns any metal into gold."

The Arabs laughed at him, and the alchemist laughed along. They thought his answer was amusing, and
they allowed the boy and the alchemist to proceed with all of their belongings.

"Are you crazy?" the boy asked the alchemist, when they had moved on. "What did you do that for?"

"To show you one of life's simple lessons," the alchemist answered. "When you possess great treasures
within you, and try to tell others of them, seldom are you believed."

They continued across the desert. With every day that passed, the boy's heart became more and more
silent. It no longer wanted to know about things of the past or future; it was content simply to
contemplate the desert, and to drink with the boy from the Soul of the World. The boy and his heart had
become friends, and neither was capable now of betraying the other.

When his heart spoke to him, it was to provide a stimulus to the boy, and to give him strength, because
the days of silence there in the desert were wearisome. His heart told the boy what his strongest qualities
were: his courage in having given up his sheep and in trying to live out his destiny, and his enthusiasm
during the time he had worked at the crystal shop.

And his heart told him something else that the boy had never noticed: it told the boy of dangers that had
threatened him, but that he had never perceived. His heart said that one time it had hidden the rifle the
boy had taken from his father, because of the possibility that the boy might wound himself. And it
reminded the boy of the day when he had been ill and vomiting out in the fields, after which he had fallen
into a deep sleep. There had been two thieves farther ahead who were planning to steal the boy's sheep
and murder him. But, since the boy hadn't passed by, they had decided to move on, thinking that he had
changed his route.

"Does a man's heart always help him?" the boy asked the alchemist.

"Mostly just the hearts of those who are trying to realize their destinies. But they do help children,
drunkards, and the elderly, too."

"Does that mean that I'll never run into danger?"

"It means only that the heart does what it can," the alchemist said.

One afternoon, they passed by the encampment of one of the tribes. At each corner of the camp were
Arabs garbed in beautiful white robes, with arms at the ready. The men were smoking their hookahs and
trading stories from the battlefield. No one paid any attention to the two travelers.

"There's no danger," the boy said, when they had moved on past the encampment.

The alchemist sounded angry: "Trust in your heart, but never forget that you're in the desert. When men
are at war with one another, the Soul of the World can hear the screams of battle. No one fails to suffer
the consequences of everything under the sun."

All things are one, the boy thought. And then, as if the desert wanted to demonstrate that the alchemist
was right, two horsemen appeared from behind the travelers.



"You can't go any farther," one of them said. "You're in the area where the tribes are at war."

"I'm not going very far," the alchemist answered, looking straight into the eyes of the horsemen. They
were silent for a moment, and then agreed that the boy and the alchemist could move along.

The boy watched the exchange with fascination. "You dominated those horsemen with the way you
looked at them," he said.

"Your eyes show the strength of your soul," answered the alchemist.

That's true, the boy thought. He had noticed that, in the midst of the multitude of armed men back at the
encampment, there had been one who stared fixedly at the two. He had been so far away that his face
wasn't even visible. But the boy was certain that he had been looking at them.

Finally, when they had crossed the mountain range that extended along the entire horizon, the alchemist
said that they were only two days from the Pyramids.

"If we're going to go our separate ways soon," the boy said, "then teach me about alchemy."

"You already know about alchemy. It is about penetrating to the Soul of the World, and discovering the
treasure that has been reserved for you."

"No, that's not what I mean. I'm talking about transforming lead into gold."

The alchemist fell as silent as the desert, and answered the boy only after they had stopped to eat.

"Everything in the universe evolved," he said. "And, for wise men, gold is the metal that evolved the
furthest. Don't ask me why; I don't know why. I just know that the Tradition is always right.

"Men have never understood the words of the wise. So gold, instead of being seen as a symbol of
evolution, became the basis for conflict."

"There are many languages spoken by things," the boy said. "There was a time when, for me, a camel's
whinnying was nothing more than whinnying. Then it became a signal of danger. And, finally, it became
just a whinny again."

But then he stopped. The alchemist probably already knew all that.

"I have known true alchemists," the alchemist continued. "They locked themselves in their laboratories,
and tried to evolve, as gold had. And they found the Philosopher's Stone, because they understood that
when something evolves, everything around that thing evolves as well.

"Others stumbled upon the stone by accident. They already had the gift, and their souls were readier for
such things than the souls of others. But they don't count. They're quite rare.

"And then there were the others, who were interested only in gold. They never found the secret. They
forgot that lead, copper, and iron have their own destinies to fulfill. And anyone who interferes with the
destiny of another thing never will discover his own."

The alchemist's words echoed out like a curse. He reached over and picked up a shell from the ground.



"This desert was once a sea," he said.

"I noticed that," the boy answered.

The alchemist told the boy to place the shell over his ear. He had done that many times when he was a
child, and had heard the sound of the sea.

"The sea has lived on in this shell, because that's its destiny. And it will never cease doing so until the
desert is once again covered by water."

They mounted their horses, and rode out in the direction of the Pyramids of Egypt.



The sun was setting when the boy's heart sounded a danger signal. They were surrounded by gigantic
dunes, and the boy looked at the alchemist to see whether he had sensed anything. But he appeared to
be unaware of any danger. Five minutes later, the boy saw two horsemen waiting ahead of them. Before
he could say anything to the alchemist, the two horsemen had become ten, and then a hundred. And then
they were everywhere in the dunes.

They were tribesmen dressed in blue, with black rings surrounding their turbans. Their faces were hidden
behind blue veils, with only their eyes showing.

Even from a distance, their eyes conveyed the strength of their souls. And their eyes spoke of death.



The two were taken to a nearby military camp. A soldier shoved the boy and the alchemist into a tent
where the chief was holding a meeting with his staff.

"These are the spies," said one of the men.

"We're just travelers," the alchemist answered.

"You were seen at the enemy camp three days ago. And you were talking with one of the troops there."

"I'm just a man who wanders the desert and knows the stars," said the alchemist. "I have no information
about troops or about the movement of the tribes. I was simply acting as a guide for my friend here."

"Who is your friend?" the chief asked.

"An alchemist," said the alchemist. "He understands the forces of nature. And he wants to show you his
extraordinary powers."

The boy listened quietly. And fearfully.

"What is a foreigner doing here?" asked another of the men.

"He has brought money to give to your tribe," said the alchemist, before the boy could say a word. And
seizing the boy's bag, the alchemist gave the gold coins to the chief.



The Arab accepted them without a word. There was enough there to buy a lot of weapons.

"What is an alchemist?" he asked, finally.

"It's a man who understands nature and the world. If he wanted to, he could destroy this camp just with
the force of the wind."

The men laughed. They were used to the ravages of war, and knew that the wind could not deliver them
a fatal blow. Yet each felt his heart beat a bit faster. They were men of the desert, and they were fearful
of sorcerers.

"I want to see him do it," said the chief.

"He needs three days," answered the alchemist. "He is going to transform himself into the wind, just to
demonstrate his powers. If he can't do so, we humbly offer you our lives, for the honor of your tribe."

"You can't offer me something that is already mine," the chief said, arrogantly. But he granted the
travelers three days.

The boy was shaking with fear, but the alchemist helped him out of the tent.

"Don't let them see that you're afraid," the alchemist said. "They are brave men, and they despise
cowards."

But the boy couldn't even speak. He was able to do so only after they had walked through the center of
the camp. There was no need to imprison them: the Arabs simply confiscated their horses. So, once
again, the world had demonstrated its many languages: the desert only moments ago had been endless
and free, and now it was an impenetrable wall.

"You gave them everything I had!" the boy said. "Everything I've saved in my entire life!"

"Well, what good would it be to you if you had t6 die?" the alchemist answered. "Your money saved us
for three days. It's not often that money saves a person's life."

But the boy was too frightened to listen to words of wisdom. He had no idea how he was going to
transform himself into the wind. He wasn't an alchemist!

The alchemist asked one of the soldiers for some tea, and poured some on the boy's wrists. A wave of
relief washed over him, and the alchemist muttered some words that the boy didn't understand.



"Don't give in to your fears," said the alchemist, in a strangely gentle voice. "If you do, you won't be able
to talk to your heart."

"But I have no idea how to turn myself into the wind."

"If a person is living out his destiny, he knows everything he needs to know. There is only one thing that
makes a dream impossible to achieve: the fear of failure."

"I'm not afraid of failing. It's just that I don't know how to turn myself into the wind."



"Well, you'll have to learn; your life depends on it."

"But what if I can't?"

"Then you'll die in the midst of trying to realize your destiny. That's a lot better than dying like millions of
other people, who never even knew what their destinies were.

"But don't worry," the alchemist continued. "Usually the threat of death makes people a lot more aware
of their lives."



The first day passed. There was a major battle nearby, and a number of wounded were brought back to
the camp. The dead soldiers were replaced by others, and life went on. Death doesn't change anything,
the boy thought.

"You could have died later on," a soldier said to the body of one of his companions. "You could have
died after peace had been declared. But, in any case, you were going to die."

At the end of the day, the boy went looking for the alchemist, who had taken his falcon out into the
desert.

"I still have no idea how to turn myself into the wind," the boy repeated.

"Remember what I told you: the world is only the visible aspect of God. And that what alchemy does is
to bring spiritual perfection into contact with the material plane."

"What are you doing?"

"Feeding my falcon."

"If I'm not able to turn myself into the wind, we're going to die," the boy said. "Why feed your falcon?"

"You're the one who may die," the alchemist said. "I already know how to turn myself into the wind."



On the second day, the boy climbed to the top of a cliff near the camp. The sentinels allowed him to go;
they had already heard about the sorcerer who could turn himself into the wind, and they didn't want to
go near him. In any case, the desert was impassable.

He spent the entire afternoon of the second day looking out over the desert, and listening to his heart.
The boy knew the desert sensed his fear. They both spoke the same language.



On the third day, the chief met with his officers. He called the alchemist to the meeting and said, "Let's
go see the boy who turns himself into the wind."



Let's," the alchemist answered.



The boy took them to the cliff where he had been on the previous day. He told them all to be seated.

"It's going to take a while," the boy said.

"We're in no hurry," the chief answered. "We are men of the desert."

The boy looked out at the horizon. There were mountains in the distance. And there were dunes, rocks,
and plants that insisted on living where survival seemed impossible. There was the desert that he had
wandered for so many months; despite all that time, he knew only a small part of it. Within that small
part, he had found an Englishman, caravans, tribal wars, and an oasis with fifty thousand palm trees and
three hundred wells.

"What do you want here today?" the desert asked him. "Didn't you spend enough time looking at me
yesterday?"

"Somewhere you are holding the person I love," the boy said. "So, when I look out over your sands, I
am also looking at her. I want to return to her, and I need your help so that I can turn myself into the
wind."

"What is love?" the desert asked.

"Love is the falcon's flight over your sands. Because for him, you are a green field, from which he always
returns with game. He knows your rocks, your dunes, and your mountains, and you are generous to him."

"The falcon's beak carries bits of me, myself," the desert said. "For years, I care for his game, feeding it
with the little water that I have, and then I show him where the game is. And, one day, as I enjoy the fact
that his game thrives on my surface, the falcon dives out of the sky, and takes away what I've created."

"But that's why you created the game in the first place," the boy answered. "To nourish the falcon. And
the falcon then nourishes man. And, eventually, man will nourish your sands, where the game will once
again flourish. That's how the world goes."

"So is that what love is?"

"Yes, that's what love is. It's what makes the game become the falcon, the falcon become man, and man,
in his turn, the desert. It's what turns lead into gold, and makes the gold return to the earth."

"I don't understand what you're talking about," the desert said.

"But you can at least understand that somewhere in your sands there is a woman waiting for me. And
that's why I have to turn myself into the wind."

The desert didn't answer him for a few moments.

Then it told him, "I'll give you my sands to help the wind to blow, but, alone, I can't do anything. You
have to ask for help from the wind."

A breeze began to blow. The tribesmen watched the boy from a distance, talking among themselves in a
language that the boy couldn't understand.

The alchemist smiled.



The wind approached the boy and touched his face. It knew of the boy's talk with the desert, because
the winds know everything. They blow across the world without a birthplace, and with no place to die.

"Help me," the boy said. "One day you carried the voice of my loved one to me."

"Who taught you to speak the language of the desert and the wind?"

"My heart," the boy answered.

The wind has many names. In that part of the world, it was called the sirocco, because it brought
moisture from the oceans to the east. In the distant land the boy came from, they called it the levanter,
because they believed that it brought with it the sands of the desert, and the screams of the Moorish
wars. Perhaps, in the places beyond the pastures where his sheep lived, men thought that the wind came
from Andalusia. But, actually, the wind came from no place at all, nor did it go to any place; that's why it
was stronger than the desert. Someone might one day plant trees in the desert, and even raise sheep
there, but never would they harness the wind.

"You can't be the wind," the wind said. "We're two very different things."

"That's not true," the boy said. "I learned the alchemist's secrets in my travels. I have inside me the
winds, the deserts, the oceans, the stars, and everything created in the universe. We were all made by the
same hand, and we have the same soul. I want to be like you, able to reach every corner of the world,
cross the seas, blow away the sands that cover my treasure, and carry the voice of the woman I love."

"I heard what you were talking about the other day with the alchemist," the wind said. "He said that
everything has its own destiny. But people can't turn themselves into the wind."

"Just teach me to be the wind for a few moments," the boy said. "So you and I can talk about the
limitless possibilities of people and the winds."

The wind's curiosity was aroused, something that had never happened before. It wanted to talk about
those things, but it didn't know how to turn a man into the wind. And look how many things the wind
already knew how to do! It created deserts, sank ships, felled entire forests, and blew through cities filled
with music and strange noises. It felt that it had no limits, yet here was a boy saying that there were other
things the wind should be able to do.

"This is what we call love," the boy said, seeing that the wind was close to granting what he requested.
"When you are loved, you can do anything in creation. When you are loved, there's no need at all to
understand what's happening, because everything happens within you, and even men can turn themselves
into the wind. As long as the wind helps, of course."

The wind was a proud being, and it was becoming irritated with what the boy was saying. It commenced
to blow harder, raising the desert sands. But finally it had to recognize that, even making its way around
the world, it didn't know how to turn a man into the wind. And it knew nothing about love.

"In my travels around the world, I've often seen people speaking of love and looking toward the
heavens," the wind said, furious at having to acknowledge its own limitations. "Maybe it's better to ask
heaven."

"Well then, help me do that," the boy said. "Fill this place with a sandstorm so strong that it blots out the



sun. Then I can look to heaven without blinding myself."

So the wind blew with all its strength, and the sky was filled with sand. The sun was turned into a golden
disk.

At the camp, it was difficult to see anything. The men of the desert were already familiar with that wind.
They called it thesimum , and it was worse than a storm at sea. Their horses cried out, and all their
weapons were filled with sand.

On the heights, one of the commanders turned to the chief and said, "Maybe we had better end this!"

They could barely see the boy. Their faces were covered with the blue cloths, and their eyes showed
fear.

"Let's stop this," another commander said.

"I want to see the greatness of Allah," the chief said, with respect. "I want to see how a man turns himself
into the wind."

But he made a mental note of the names of the two men who had expressed their fear. As soon as the
wind stopped, he was going to remove them from their commands, because true men of the desert are
not afraid.

"The wind told me that you know about love " the boy said to the sun. "If you know about love, you
must also know about the Soul of the World, because it's made of love."

"From where I am," the sun said, "I can see the Soul of the World. It communicates with my soul, and
together we cause the plants to grow and the sheep to seek out shade. From where I am — and I'm a
long way from the earth — I learned how to love. I know that if I came even a little bit closer to the earth,
everything there would die, and the Soul of the World would no longer exist. So we contemplate each
other, and we want each other, and I give it life and warmth, and it gives me my reason for living."

"So you know about love," the boy said.

"And I know the Soul of the World, because we have talked at great length to each other during this
endless trip through the universe. It tells me that its greatest problem is that, up until now, only the
minerals and vegetables understand that all things are one. That there's no need for iron to be the same as
copper, or copper the same as gold. Each performs its own exact function as a unique being, and
everything would be a symphony of peace if the hand that wrote all this had stopped on the fifth day of
creation.

"But there was a sixth day," the sun went on.

"You are wise, because you observe everything from a distance," the boy said. "But you don't know
about love. If there hadn't been a sixth day, man would not exist; copper would always be just copper,
and lead just lead. It's true that everything has its destiny, but one day that destiny will be realized. So
each thing has to transform itself into something better, and to acquire a new destiny, until, someday, the
Soul of the World becomes one thing only."

The sun thought about that, and decided to shine more brightly. The wind, which was enjoying the
conversation, started to blow with greater force, so that the sun would not blind the boy.



"This is why alchemy exists," the boy said. "So that everyone will search for his treasure, find it, and then
want to be better than he was in his former life. Lead will play its role until the world has no further need
for lead; and then lead will have to turn itself into gold.

"That's what alchemists do. They show that, when we strive to become better than we are, everything
around us becomes better, too."

"Well, why did you say that I don't know about love?" the sun asked the boy.

"Because it's not love to be static like the desert, nor is it love to roam the world like the wind. And it's
not love to see everything from a distance, like you do. Love is the force that transforms and improves
the Soul of the World. When I first reached through to it, I thought the Soul of the World was perfect.
But later, I could see that it was like other aspects of creation, and had its own passions and wars. It is
we who nourish the Soul of the World, and the world we live in will be either better or worse, depending
on whether we become better or worse. And that's where the power of love comes in. Because when
we love, we always strive to become better than we are."

"So what do you want of me?" the sun asked.

"I want you to help me turn myself into the wind," the boy answered.

"Nature knows me as the wisest being in creation," the sun said. "But I don't know how to turn you into
the wind."

"Then, whom should I ask?"

The sun thought for a minute. The wind was listening closely, and wanted to tell every comer of the
world that the sun's wisdom had its Umitations. That it was unable to deal with this boy who spoke the
Language of the World.

"Speak to the hand that wrote all," said the sun.

The wind screamed with delight, and blew harder than ever. The tents were being blown from their ties
to the earth, and the animals were being freed from their tethers. On the cliff, the men clutched at each
other as they sought to keep from being blown away.

The boy turned to the hand that wrote all. As he did so, he sensed that the universe had fallen silent, and
he decided not to speak.

A current of love rushed from his heart, and the boy began to pray. It was a prayer that he had never
said before, because it was a prayer without words or pleas. His prayer didn't give thanks for his sheep
having found new pastures; it didn't ask that the boy be able to sell more crystal; and it didn't beseech
that the woman he had met continue to await his return. In the silence, the boy understood that the desert,
the wind, and the sun were also trying to understand the signs written by the hand, and were seeking to
follow their paths, and to understand what had been written on a single emerald. He saw that omens
were scattered throughout the earth and in space, and that there was no reason or significance attached
to their appearance; he could see that not the deserts, nor the winds, nor the sun, nor people knew why
they had been created. But that the hand had a reason for all of this, and that only the hand could perform
miracles, or transform the sea into a desert. . . or a man into the wind. Because only the hand understood
that it was a larger design that had moved the universe to the point at which six days of creation had



evolved into a Master Work.

The boy reached through to the Soul of the World, and saw that it was a part of the Soul of God. And
he saw that the Soul of God was his own soul. And that he, a boy, could perform miracles.



Thesimum blew that day as it had never blown before. For generations thereafter, the Arabs recounted
the legend of a boy who had turned himself into the wind, almost destroying a military camp, in defiance
of the most powerful chief in the desert.

When thesimum ceased to blow, everyone looked to the place where the boy had been. But he was no
longer there; he was standing next to a sand-covered sentinel, on the far side of the camp.

The men were terrified at his sorcery. But there were two people who were smiling: the alchemist,
because he had found his perfect disciple, and the chief, because that disciple had understood the glory
of God.

The following day, the general bade the boy and the alchemist farewell, and provided them with an
escort party to accompany them as far as they chose.



They rode for the entire day. Toward the end of the afternoon, they came upon a Coptic monastery. The
alchemist dismounted, and told the escorts they could return to the camp.

"From here on, you will be alone," the alchemist said. "You are only three hours from the Pyramids."

"Thank you," said the boy. "You taught me the Language of the World."

"I only invoked what you already knew."

The alchemist knocked on the gate of the monastery. A monk dressed in black came to the gates. They
spoke for a few minutes in the Coptic tongue, and the alchemist bade the boy enter.

"I asked him to let me use the kitchen for a while," the alchemist smiled.

They went to the kitchen at the back of the monastery. The alchemist lighted the fire, and the monk
brought him some lead, which the alchemist placed in an iron pan. When the lead had become liquid, the
alchemist took from his pouch the strange yellow egg. He scraped from it a sliver as thin as a hair,
wrapped it in wax, and added it to the pan in which the lead had melted.

The mixture took on a reddish color, almost the color of blood. The alchemist removed the pan from the
fire, and set it aside to cool. As he did so, he talked with the monk about the tribal wars.

"I think they're going to last for a long time," he said to the monk.

The monk was irritated. The caravans had been stopped at Giza for some time, waiting for the wars to
end. "But God's will be done," the monk said.

"Exactly," answered the alchemist.



When the pan had cooled, the monk and the boy looked at it, dazzled. The lead had dried into the shape
of the pan, but it was no longer lead. It was gold.

"Will I learn to do that someday?" the boy asked.

"This was my destiny, not yours," the alchemist answered. "But I wanted to show you that it was
possible."

They returned to the gates of the monastery. There, the alchemist separated the disk into four parts.

"This is for you," he said, holding one of the parts out to the monk. "It's for your generosity to the
pilgrims."

"But this payment goes well beyond my generosity," the monk responded.

"Don't say that again. Life might be listening, and give you less the next time."

The alchemist turned to the boy. "This is for you. To make up for what you gave to the general."

The boy was about to say that it was much more than he had given the general. But he kept quiet,
because he had heard what the alchemist said to the monk.

"And this is for me," said the alchemist, keeping one of the parts. "Because I have to return to the desert,
where there are tribal wars."

He took the fourth part and handed it to the monk.

"This is for the boy. If he ever needs it."

"But I'm going in search of my treasure," the boy said. "I'm very close to it now."

"And I'm certain you'll find it," the alchemist said.

"Then why this?"

"Because you have already lost your savings twice. Once to the thief, and once to the general. I'm an
old, superstitious Arab, and I believe in our proverbs. There's one that says, 'Everything that happens
once can never happen again. But everything that happens twice will surely happen a third time.' " They
mounted their horses.



"I want to tell you a story about dreams," said the alchemist.

The boy brought his horse closer.

"In ancient Rome, at the time of Emperor Tiberius, there lived a good man who had two sons. One was
in the military, and had been sent to the most distant regions of the empire. The other son was a poet, and
delighted all of Rome with his beautiful verses.



"One night, the father had a dream. An angel appeared to him, and told him that the words of one of his
sons would be learned and repeated throughout the world for all generations to come. The father woke
from his dream grateful and crying, because life was generous, and had revealed to him something any
father would be proud to know.

"Shortly thereafter, the father died as he tried to save a child who was about to be crushed by the wheels
of a chariot. Since he had lived his entire life in a manner that was correct and fair, he went directly to
heaven, where he met the angel that had appeared in his dream.

" 'You were always a good man,' the angel said to him. 'You lived your life in a loving way, and died
with dignity. I can now grant you any wish you desire.'

" 'Life was good to me,' the man said. "When you appeared in my dream, I felt that all my efforts had
been rewarded, because my son's poems will be read by men for generations to come. I don't want
anything for myself. But any father would be proud of the fame achieved by one whom he had cared for
as a child, and educated as he grew up. Sometime in the distant future, I would like to see my son's
words.'

"The angel touched the man's shoulder, and they were both projected far into the future. They were in an
immense setting, surrounded by thousands of people speaking a strange language.

"The man wept with happiness.

" 'I knew that my son's poems were immortal,' he said to the angel through his tears. 'Can you please tell
me which of my son's poems these people are repeating?'

"The angel came closer to the man, and, with tenderness, led him to a bench nearby, where they sat
down.

'"The verses of your son who was the poet were very popular in Rome,' the angel said. 'Everyone loved
them and enjoyed them. But when the reign of Tiberius ended, his poems were forgotten. The words
you're hearing now are those of your son in the military.'

"The man looked at the angel in surprise.

" Your son went to serve at a distant place, and became a centurion. He was just and good. One
afternoon, one of his servants fell ill, and it appeared that he would die. Your son had heard of a rabbi
who was able to cure illnesses, and he rode out for days and days in search of this man. Along the way,
he learned that the man he was seeking was the Son of God. He met others who had been cured by him,
and they instructed your son in the man's teachings. And so, despite the fact that he was a Roman
centurion, he converted to their faith. Shortly thereafter, he reached the place where the man he was
looking for was visiting.'

" 'He told the man that one of his servants was gravely ill, and the rabbi made ready to go to his house
with him. But the centurion was a man of faith, and, looking into the eyes of the rabbi, he knew that he
was surely in the presence of the Son of God.'

" And this is what your son said,' the angel told the man. These are the words he said to the rabbi at
that point, and they have never been forgotten: "My Lord, I am not worthy that you should come under
my roof. But only speak a word and my servant will be healed." '"



The alchemist said, "No matter what he does, every person on earth plays a central role in the history of
the world. And normally he doesn't know it."

The boy smiled. He had never imagined that questions about life would be of such importance to a
shepherd.

"Good-bye," the alchemist said.

"Good-bye," said the boy.



The boy rode along through the desert for several hours, listening avidly to what his heart had to say. It
was his heart that would tell him where his treasure was hidden.

"Where your treasure is, there also will be your heart," the alchemist had told him.

But his heart was speaking of other things. With pride, it told the story of a shepherd who had left his
flock to follow a dream he had on two different occasions. It told of destiny, and of the many men who
had wandered in search of distant lands or beautiful women, confronting the people of their times with
their preconceived notions. It spoke of journeys, discoveries, books, and change.

As he was about to climb yet another dune, his heart whispered, "Be aware of the place where you are
brought to tears. That's where I am, and that's where your treasure is."

The boy climbed the dune slowly. A full moon rose again in the starry sky: it had been a month since he
had set forth from the oasis. The moonlight cast shadows through the dunes, creating the appearance of a
rolling sea; it reminded the boy of the day when that horse had reared in the desert, and he had come to
know the alchemist. And the moon fell on the desert's silence, and on a man's journey in search of
treasure.

When he reached the top of the dune, his heart leapt. There, illuminated by the light of the moon and the
brightness of the desert, stood the solemn and majestic Pyramids of Egypt.

The boy fell to his knees and wept. He thanked God for making him believe in his destiny, and for
leading him to meet a king, a merchant, an Englishman, and an alchemist. And above all for his having met
a woman of the desert who had told him that love would never keep a man from his destiny.

If he wanted to, he could now return to the oasis, go back to Fatima, and live his life as a simple
shepherd. After all, the alchemist continued to live in the desert, even though he understood the Language
of the World, and knew how to transform lead into gold. He didn't need to demonstrate his science and
art to anyone. The boy told himself that, on the way toward realizing his own destiny, he had learned all
he needed to know, and had experienced everything he might have dreamed of.

But here he was, at the point of finding his treasure, and he reminded himself that no project is
completed until its objective has been achieved. The boy looked at the sands around him, and saw that,
where his tears had fallen, a scarab beetle was scuttling through the sand. During his time in the desert, he
had learned that, in Egypt, the scarab beetles are a symbol of God.

Another omen! The boy began to dig into the dune. As he did so, he thought of what the crystal
merchant had once said: that anyone could build a pyramid in his backyard. The boy could see now that



he couldn't do so if he placed stone upon stone for the rest of his life.

Throughout the night, the boy dug at the place he had chosen, but found nothing. He felt weighted down
by the centuries of time since the Pyramids had been built. But he didn't stop. He struggled to continue
digging as he fought the wind, which often blew the sand back into the excavation. His hands were
abraded and exhausted, but he listened to his heart. It had told him to dig where his tears fell.

As he was attempting to pull out the rocks he encountered, he heard footsteps. Several figures
approached him. Their backs were to the moonlight, and the boy could see neither their eyes nor their
faces.

"What are you doing here?" one of the figures demanded.

Because he was terrified, the boy didn't answer. He had found where his treasure was, and was
frightened at what might happen.

"We're refugees from the tribal wars, and we need money," the other figure said. "What are you hiding
there?"

"I'm not hiding anything," the boy answered.

But one of them seized the boy and yanked him back out of the hole. Another, who was searching the
boy's bags, found the piece of gold.

"There's gold here," he said.

The moon shone on the face of the Arab who had seized him, and in the man's eyes the boy saw death.

"He's probably got more gold hidden in the ground."

They made the boy continue digging, but he found nothing. As the sun rose, the men began to beat the
boy. He was bruised and bleeding, his clothing was torn to shreds, and he felt that death was near.

"What good is money to you if you're going to die? It's not often that money can save someone's life,"
the alchemist had said. Finally, the boy screamed at the men, "I'm digging for treasure!" And, although his
mouth was bleeding and swollen, he told his attackers that he had twice dreamed of a treasure hidden
near the Pyramids of Egypt.

The man who appeared to be the leader of the group spoke to one of the others: "Leave him. He doesn't
have anything else. He must have stolen this gold."

The boy fell to the sand, nearly unconscious. The leader shook him and said, "We're leaving."

But before they left, he came back to the boy and said, "You're not going to die. You'll live, and you'll
learn that a man shouldn't be so stupid. Two years ago, right here on this spot, I had a recurrent dream,
too. I dreamed that I should travel to the fields of Spain and look for a ruined church where shepherds
and their sheep slept. In my dream, there was a sycamore growing out of the ruins of the sacristy, and I
was told that, if I dug at the roots of the sycamore, I would find a hidden treasure. But I'm not so stupid
as to cross an entire desert just because of a recurrent dream."

And they disappeared.



The boy stood up shakily, and looked once more at the Pyramids. They seemed to laugh at him, and he
laughed back, his heart bursting with joy.

Because now he knew where his treasure was.



EPILOGUE



The boy reached the small, abandoned church just as night was falling. The sycamore was still there in
the sacristy, and the stars could still be seen through the half-destroyed roof. He remembered the time he
had been there with his sheep; it had been a peaceful night. . . except for the dream.

Now he was here not with his flock, but with a shovel.

He sat looking at the sky for a long time. Then he took from his knapsack a bottle of wine, and drank
some. He remembered the night in the desert when he had sat with the alchemist, as they looked at the
stars and drank wine together. He thought of the many roads he had traveled, and of the strange way
God had chosen to show him his treasure. If he hadn't believed in the significance of recurrent dreams, he
would not have met the Gypsy woman, the king, the thief, or. . . "Well, it's a long list. But the path was
written in the omens, and there was no way I could go wrong," he said to himself.

He fell asleep, and when he awoke the sun was already high. He began to dig at the base of the
sycamore.

"You old sorcerer," the boy shouted up to the sky. "You knew the whole story. You even left a bit of
gold at the monastery so I could get back to this church. The monk laughed when he saw me come back
in tatters. Couldn't you have saved me from that?"

"No," he heard a voice on the wind say. "If I had told you, you wouldn't have seen the Pyramids.
They're beautiful, aren't they?"

The boy smiled, and continued digging. Half an hour later, his shovel hit something solid. An hour later,
he had before him a chest of Spanish gold coins. There were also precious stones, gold masks adorned
with red and white feathers, and stone statues embedded with jewels. The spoils of a conquest that the
country had long ago forgotten, and that some conquistador had failed to tell his children about.

The boy took out Urim and Thummim from his bag. He had used the two stones only once, one morning
when he was at a marketplace. His life and his path had always provided him with enough omens.

He placed Urim and Thummim in the chest. They were also a part of his new treasure, because they
were a reminder of the old king, whom he would never see again.

It's true; life really is generous to those who pursue their destiny, the boy thought. Then he remembered
that he had to get to Tarifa so he could give one-tenth of his treasure to the Gypsy woman, as he had
promised. Those Gypsies are really smart, he thought. Maybe it was because they moved around so
much.

The wind began to blow again. It was the levanter, the wind that came fromAfrica . It didn't bring with it
the smell of the desert, nor the threat of Moorish invasion. Instead, it brought the scent of a perfume he



knew well, and the touch of a kiss — a kiss that came from far away, slowly, slowly, until it rested on his
lips.

The boy smiled. It was the first time she had done that.

"I'm coming,Fatima ," he said.

EVERY morning, when I open my eyes to the so-called “new day,” I feel like closing them again, staying in bed, and not getting up. But I can’t do that.


I have a wonderful husband who is not only madly in love with me, but also the owner of a large investment fund. Every year—much to his distaste—he appears in Bilan magazine’s list of the three hundred richest people in Switzerland.

I have two children who are (as my friends say) my “reason for living.” I get up early to make their breakfast and take them on the five-minute walk to school, where they spend all day, allowing me to work and fill my time. After school, a Filipino nanny looks after them until my husband and I get home.

I enjoy my work. I’m a highly regarded journalist at a respectable newspaper that can be found in almost all the news kiosks in Geneva, where we live.

Once a year, I go on holiday with the whole family, usually to some far-flung paradise with marvelous beaches, where we stay in exotic cities inhabited by very poor people who make us feel richer, more privileged, and more grateful for the blessings life has bestowed upon us.

Ah, but I haven’t introduced myself. Pleased to meet you. My name’s Linda. I’m in my thirties, five-foot-eight, 150 pounds, and I wear the best clothes that money can buy (thanks to my husband’s limitless generosity). I arouse desire in men and envy in other women.

And yet, every morning, when I open my eyes to this ideal life that everyone dreams of having but few achieve, I know the day will be a disaster. Until the beginning of this year, I didn’t question anything. I simply got on with my life, although, now and then, I did feel guilty about having more than I deserved. One day, though, while I was making everyone breakfast (it was spring, I remember, and the flowers were just beginning to open in the garden), I asked myself: “Is this it?”

I shouldn’t have asked that question. It was all the fault of a writer I’d interviewed the previous day who, at one point, said:

“I haven’t the slightest interest in being happy. I prefer to live life passionately, which is dangerous because you never know what might happen next.”

At the time, I thought: “Poor man. He’s never satisfied. He’ll die sad and embittered.”

The following day, I realized that I never take any risks at all.

I know what lies ahead of me: another day exactly like the previous one. And passion? Well, I love my husband, which means that I’ve no cause to get depressed over living with someone purely for the sake of his money, the children, or to keep up appearances.

I live in the safest country in the world, I have no problems to speak of, and I’m a good wife and mother. I was brought up as a strict Protestant and intend to pass that education on to my children. I never take a false step because I know how easy it is to ruin everything. I do what I have to do efficiently and put as little of myself into it as possible. When I was younger, I experienced the pain of unrequited love, just like any other normal person.

Since I married, though, time has stopped.

Until, that is, I came across that horrible writer and his answer to my question. I mean, what’s wrong with routine and boredom?

To be honest, nothing at all. It’s just … it’s just the secret fear that everything could change from one moment to the next, catching me completely unawares.

From the moment I had that ominous thought that bright, beautiful morning, I began to feel afraid. Would I be capable of facing the world alone if my husband died? “Yes,” I told myself, because the money he left behind would be enough to support several generations. And if I died, who would look after my children? My beloved husband. But he would surely remarry, because he’s rich, charming, and intelligent. Would my children be in good hands?

The first thing I did was try to answer all my questions. And the more questions I answered, the more questions appeared. Will he take a mistress when I get old? We don’t make love as often as we used to—does he already have someone else? Does he think I’ve found someone else because I haven’t shown much interest in sex for the last three years?

We never have jealous spats, and I used to think that was great, but after that spring morning, I began to suspect that perhaps our lack of jealousy meant a complete lack of love on both sides.

I did my best not to think about the matter anymore.

For a whole week, whenever I left work, I would go and buy something in one of the expensive shops on Rue du Rhône. There was nothing I really wanted, but at least I felt that I was—how should I say this?—changing something, discovering something I didn’t even know I needed, like some new domestic appliance, although it has to be said, novelties in the world of domestic appliances are few and far between. I avoided toy shops, because I didn’t want to spoil my children by giving them a present every day. I didn’t go into any men’s shops, either, just in case my husband might grow suspicious of my sudden extreme generosity.

When I got home and entered the enchanted realm of my domestic world, everything would seem marvelous for a few hours, until everyone went to bed. Then, slowly, the nightmare would begin.

I think that passion is strictly for the young. Presumably, its absence is normal at my age, but that isn’t what terrifies me.

Today I am a woman torn between the terror that everything might change and the equal terror that everything might carry on exactly the same for the rest of my days. Some people say that, as summer approaches, we start to have weird ideas; we feel smaller because we spend more time out in the open air, and that makes us aware of how large the world is. The horizon seems farther away, beyond the clouds and the walls of our house.

That may be true, but I just can’t sleep anymore, and it isn’t because of the heat. When night comes and no one is watching, I feel afraid of everything: life, death, love or the lack of it; the fact that all novelties quickly become habits; the feeling that I’m wasting the best years of my life in a pattern that will be repeated over and over until I die; and sheer panic at facing the unknown, however exciting and adventurous that might be.

Naturally, I seek consolation in other people’s suffering.

I turn on the TV and watch the news. I see endless reports about accidents, people made homeless by natural disasters, refugees. How many people on the planet are ill right now? How many, whether in silence or not, are suffering injustices and betrayals? How many poor people are there, how many unemployed or imprisoned?

I change channels. I watch a soap or a movie and for a few minutes or hours I forget everything. I’m terrified my husband might wake up and ask: “What’s wrong, babe?” Because then I would have to say that everything’s fine. It would be even worse if—as happened a few times last month—he put his hand on my thigh, slid it slowly upward and started caressing me. I can fake orgasms—I often have—but I can’t just decide to get wet with excitement.

I would have to say that I’m really tired, and he, never for one moment admitting that he was annoyed, would give me a kiss, turn over, and watch the latest news on his tablet, waiting until the next day. And then I would hope against hope that when the next day comes, he’d be tired. Very tired.

It’s not always like that, though. Sometimes I have to take the initiative. If I reject him two nights in a row, he might go looking for a mistress, and I really don’t want to lose him. If I masturbate beforehand, then I’m ready and everything’s normal again.

“Normal” means that nothing will ever be as it was in the days when we were still a mystery to each other.

Keeping the same fire burning after ten years of marriage seems a complete impossibility to me. And each time I fake an orgasm, I die a little inside. A little? I think I’m dying more quickly than I thought.

My friends tell me how lucky I am, because I lie to them and tell them that we often make love, just as they lie to me when they say that they don’t know how their husbands can still be so interested in sex. They say that sex in marriage is interesting only for the first five years, and after that calls for a little “imagination.” Closing your eyes and imagining your neighbor lying on top of you, doing things your husband would never dare to do. Imagining having sex with him and your husband at the same time. Imagining every possible perversion, every forbidden game.





TODAY, when I leave the house to walk the kids to school, I take a good look at my neighbor. I’ve never imagined having sex with him. I’d rather imagine having sex with a young reporter who works with me, the one who seems to be in a permanent state of suffering and solitude. I’ve never seen him try to seduce anyone, and that’s what’s so charming. All the women in the office have commented that “the poor thing needs someone to look after him.” I reckon he knows this and is happy merely to be an object of desire, nothing more. Perhaps, like me, he has a terrible fear of taking a false step and ruining everything—his job, his family, his past and future life.


Anyway, I look at my neighbor this morning and feel like crying. He is washing his car, and I think: “Look at that, another person just like me and my husband. One day we’ll be doing the same thing. Our children will have grown up and moved to another city, or even another country. We’ll be retired, and will spend our time washing our cars even if we can perfectly well afford to pay someone else to do it for us. After a certain age, you have to do irrelevant things—to pass the time, to show others that your body is still in working order, to express that you still appreciate the value of money and can still carry out certain humble tasks.”

A clean car won’t exactly change the world, but this morning, it is the only thing my neighbor cares about. He says good morning, smiles, and goes back to his work as if he were polishing a Rodin sculpture.





I LEAVE my car at the park-and-ride (Take the bus into town! Say “No” to pollution!). I catch the usual bus and look at the same things I always look at on the way in to work. Geneva doesn’t seem to have changed at all since I was a child; the grand old houses are still between the buildings put up by some mad mayor who discovered “new architecture” in the 1950s.


I miss all of this when I travel. The appalling bad taste, the absence of huge glass-and-steel towers, the lack of highways, the tree roots that push through the concrete sidewalks and trip you up, the public parks with their mysterious little wooden fences overgrown with weeds because “that’s what nature is like.” In short, a city that is different from others that have been modernized and lost their charm.

Here, we still say “Good morning” when we meet a stranger in the street and “Good-bye” when we leave a shop after buying a bottle of mineral water, even if we have no intention of ever going back. We still chat to strangers on the bus, even though the rest of the world thinks of the Swiss as being very discreet and reserved.

How wrong they are! But it’s good that other people should think of us like that, because that way we can preserve our way of life for another five or six centuries, before the Barbarians cross the Alps with their wonderful electronic gadgets; their apartments with tiny bedrooms and large living rooms to impress the guests; their women, who wear too much makeup; their men, who talk loudly and bother the neighbors; and their teenagers, who dress rebelliously but who are secretly terrified of what their parents might think.

Let them believe that all we produce is cheese, chocolate, cows, and cuckoo clocks. Let them believe that there’s a bank on every corner in Geneva. We have no intention of changing that image. We’re happy without the Barbarian hordes. We’re all armed to the teeth (since military service is obligatory, every Swiss man has a rifle in his house), but you rarely hear of anyone shooting anyone else.

We’re pleased that we haven’t changed for centuries. We feel proud to have remained neutral when Europe sent its sons off to fight senseless wars. We’re glad not to have to explain Geneva’s somewhat unattractive appearance, with its fin de siècle cafés and elderly ladies strolling about the city.

To say “we’re happy” might not be entirely true. Everyone is happy apart from me, as I travel to work wondering what’s wrong.





ANOTHER day at the newspaper, trying to ferret out some interesting news other than the usual car accident, weaponless mugging, and fire (which dozens of fire engines manned by highly qualified firemen rushed to put out and flooded an old apartment. All because the neighbors were alarmed about the smoke issuing from a pot roast left too long in the oven).


Back home, there’s the pleasure of cooking, the table set, and the family gathered around it, thanking God for the food we’re about to receive. Another evening when, after supper, each person goes about his business—the father helping the children with their homework, the mother cleaning the kitchen, tidying the house, and putting out the money for the maid the next morning.

There are times during these months when I feel really good, when I really believe that my life makes perfect sense, that this is the role of human beings on Earth. The children feel that their mother is at peace, their father is kinder and more attentive, and the whole house seems to glow with its own light. We are an example of happiness to the rest of the street, the city, the canton—or what you might call the state—of the entire country. And then suddenly, for no reason, I get into the shower and burst into tears. I can cry there because no one can hear my sobs or ask me the question I hate most: “Are you all right?”

Yes, why shouldn’t I be? Is there anything wrong with my life?

No, nothing.

Only the nights that fill me with dread.

The days I can’t get excited about.

The happy images from the past and the things that could have been but weren’t.

The desire for adventure never fulfilled.

The terror of not knowing what will happen to my children.

Then my thoughts start to circle negative things, always the same, as if there were a devil watching from one corner of the room, ready to leap out and tell me that what I call “happiness” is merely a passing phase, that nothing lasts. Surely I know that.

I want to change. I need to change. Today at work I got ridiculously uptight, simply because an intern took longer than usual to find the material I wanted. I’m not normally like that, but I’m gradually losing touch with myself.

It’s silly to blame it all on that writer and his interview. That was months ago. He merely took the top off a volcano that could have erupted at any moment, sowing death and destruction around it. If it hadn’t been him, it would have been a film, a book, or someone else I happened to talk to. I imagine that some people spend years allowing the pressure to build up inside them without even noticing, and then one day some tiny incident triggers a crisis.

Then they say: “I’ve had enough, I don’t want this anymore.”

Some commit suicide. Others get divorced. Some go to poor parts of Africa to try to save the world.

But I know myself. I know that my only reaction will be to repress my feelings until a cancer starts eating me up inside. Because I do actually believe that many illnesses are the result of repressed emotions.





I WAKE at two in the morning and lie staring up at the ceiling—something I’ve always hated—even though I know I have to get up early to go to work. Instead of coming up with a productive question like “What’s happening to me?” I let my thoughts spiral out of control. For days now—although not that many, thank God—I’ve been wondering if I should go to a psychiatrist and seek help. What stops me isn’t my work or my husband, but my children. They couldn’t understand what I’m feeling at all.


Everything grows more intense. I think about a marriage, my marriage, in which jealousy plays no part. But we women have a sixth sense. Perhaps my husband has already met someone else and I’m unconsciously responding to that. And yet I have absolutely no reason to suspect him.

Isn’t this absurd? Can it be that of all the men in the world, I have married the only one who is absolutely perfect? He doesn’t drink or go out at night, and he never spends a day alone with his friends. The family is his entire life.

It would be a dream if it weren’t a nightmare. Because I have to reciprocate.

Then I realize that words like “optimism” and “hope,” which appear in all those self-help books that claim they’ll make us more confident and better able to cope with life, are just that: words. The wise people who pronounce them are perhaps looking for some meaning in their own life and using us as guinea pigs to see how we’ll react to the stimulus.

The fact is, I’m tired of having such a happy, perfect life. And that can only be a sign of mental illness.

That’s what I fall asleep thinking. Perhaps I really do have a serious problem.





I HAVE lunch with a friend.


She suggests meeting at a Japanese restaurant I’ve never heard of, which is odd, because I adore Japanese food. She assures me that it’s an excellent place, although quite some way from where I work.

It takes ages to get there. I have to take two buses and ask someone the way to the gallery, home to this supposedly “excellent” restaurant. I think the place is hideous—the décor, the paper tablecloths, the lack of any view. She’s right, though. It’s one of the best meals I’ve ever eaten in Geneva.

“I always used to eat in the same restaurant, which was okay, but nothing special,” she says. “Then a friend of mine who works at the Japanese consulate suggested this one. I thought it was pretty ghastly at first, as you probably did, too. But it’s the owners themselves who run the restaurant, and that makes all the difference.”

It occurs to me that I always go to the same restaurants and order the same dishes. I don’t even take any risks in this.

My friend is on antidepressants. That’s the last thing I want to talk about, though, because I’ve come to the conclusion that I’m just a step away from sliding into depression and I don’t want to accept that.

And precisely because it’s the last thing I want to talk about, it’s the very first subject I bring up.

I ask how she’s feeling.

“Much better,” she says, “although the medication can take a while to work. Once it kicks in, though, you regain your interest in life; things get back their color and flavor.”

In other words, suffering has become yet another source of income for the pharmaceutical industry. Feeling sad? Take a pill and problem solved.

I ask, very gingerly, if she would be interested in collaborating on a major article on depression for the newspaper.

“There’s no point. Nowadays people share their feelings on the Internet.”

What do they discuss?

“The side effects of the different medications. No one’s interested in other people’s symptoms, because symptoms are infectious, and you’d suddenly start feeling things you didn’t feel before.”

Is that all?

“No, there are meditation exercises, too, but I don’t think they’re much use. I only started to get better once I accepted that I had a problem.”

But doesn’t it help to know you’re not alone? Isn’t talking about depression’s effects good for other people, too?

“No, not at all. If you’ve just emerged from hell, you don’t want to know what life is like down there right now.”

Why did you put up with it for so many years?

“Because I didn’t believe I could be depressed. And because whenever I talked about it with you or with other friends, everyone said it was nonsense, that people with real problems don’t have time to feel depressed.”

It’s true, that’s exactly what I said.

I insist: Wouldn’t an article or a blog help people to better cope with the illness and seek help? I’m not depressed myself, of course, and don’t know how it feels. Could she tell me a bit about it?

My friend hesitates, perhaps suspicious of my motives.

“It’s like being inside a trap. You know you’re caught, but you can’t escape …”

That’s exactly what I felt a few days ago.

She starts listing a whole series of things that are apparently common to those who have visited what she calls “hell.” Not wanting to get out of bed. Feeling that the simplest of tasks requires a Herculean effort. Being riddled with guilt because you have no reason to feel like this when there are so many people in the world who are really suffering.

I try to concentrate on the excellent food, but it has already started to lose its flavor. My friend goes on:

“Apathy. Pretending to be happy, pretending to be sad, pretending to have an orgasm, pretending to be having fun, pretending that you’ve slept well, pretending that you’re alive. Until there comes a point where you reach an imaginary red line and realize that if you cross it, there will be no turning back. Then you stop complaining, because complaining means that you are at least still battling something. You accept the vegetative state and try to conceal it from everyone. And that’s hard work.”

And what caused your depression?

“Nothing in particular. But why so many questions? Are you feeling depressed, too?”

Of course not!

Best to change the subject.

We talk about the politician I’m going to interview in a couple days’ time. He’s an ex-boyfriend of mine from high school who probably doesn’t even remember that we once exchanged a few kisses and that he touched my breasts.

My friend is thrilled. I, on the other hand, try not to think about anything, keeping my reactions set to automatic.

Apathy. I haven’t yet reached that stage. I’m still at the complaining one, but I imagine that soon—in a matter of months, days, or hours—a complete lack of interest will set in that will be very hard to dispel.

It feels like my soul is slowly leaving my body and heading off to an unknown place, some “safe” place where it doesn’t have to put up with me and my night terrors. It’s as if I weren’t sitting in an ugly Japanese restaurant with delicious food, experiencing everything as though it were just a scene in a film I’m watching, without wanting—or being able—to stop it.





I WAKE up and perform the usual rituals—brushing my teeth, getting dressed for work, going into the children’s bedroom to wake them up, making breakfast for everyone, smiling, and saying how good life is. In every minute and gesture I feel a weight I can’t identify, like an animal who can’t quite understand how it got caught in the trap.


My food has no taste. My smile, on the other hand, grows even wider so that no one will suspect, and I swallow my desire to cry. The light outside seems gray.

Yesterday’s conversation did no good at all; I’m starting to think that I’m headed out of the indignant phase and straight into apathy.

And does no one notice?

Of course not. After all, I’m the last person in the world to admit that I need help.

This is my problem; the volcano has exploded and there’s no way to put the lava back inside, plant some trees, mow the grass, and let the sheep out to graze.

I don’t deserve this. I’ve always tried to meet everyone’s expectations. But now it’s happened and I can’t do anything about it except take medication. Perhaps today I’ll come up with an excuse to write an article about psychiatry and social security (the newspaper loves that kind of thing) and find a good psychiatrist to ask for help. I know that’s not ethical, but then not everything is.

I don’t have an obsession to occupy my mind—for example, dieting or being OCD and finding fault with the cleaning lady who arrives at eight in the morning and leaves at five in the afternoon, having washed and ironed the clothes, and tidied the house, and, sometimes, having even done the shopping, too. I can’t vent my frustrations by trying to be Supermom, because my children would resent me for the rest of their lives.

I go off to work and again see the neighbor polishing his car. Wasn’t he doing that yesterday?

Unable to resist, I go over and ask him why.

“It wasn’t quite perfect,” he says, but only after having said “Good morning,” asking about the family, and noticing what a pretty dress I’m wearing.

I look at the car. It’s an Audi—one of Geneva’s nicknames is, after all, Audiland. It looks perfect, but he shows me one or two places where it isn’t as shiny as it should be.

I draw out the conversation and end up asking what he thinks people are looking for in life.

“Oh, that’s easy enough. Being able to pay their bills. Buying a house like yours or mine. Having a garden full of trees. Having your children or grandchildren over for Sunday lunch. Traveling the world once you’ve retired.”

Is that what people want from life? Is it really? There’s something very wrong with this world, and it isn’t just the wars going on in Asia or the Middle East.

Before I go to the newspaper, I have to interview Jacob, my ex-boyfriend from high school. Not even that cheers me up. I really am losing interest in things.





I LISTEN to facts about government policy that I didn’t even want to know. I ask a few awkward questions, which he deftly dodges. He’s a year younger than me, but he looks five years older. I keep this thought to myself.


Of course, it’s good to see him again, although he hasn’t yet asked me what’s happened in my life since we each went our own way after graduation. He’s entirely focused on himself, his career, and his future, while I find myself staring foolishly back at the past as if I were still the adolescent who, despite the braces on my teeth, was the envy of all the other girls. After a while, I stop listening and go on autopilot. Always the same script, the same promises—reducing taxes, combating crime, keeping the French (the so-called cross-border workers who are taking jobs that Swiss workers could fill) out. Year after year, the issues are the same and the problems continue unresolved because no one really cares.

After twenty minutes of conversation, I start to wonder if my lack of interest is due to my strange state of mind. No. There is nothing more tedious than interviewing politicians. It would have been better if I’d been sent to cover some crime or another. Murderers are much more real.

Compared to representatives of the people anywhere else on the planet, ours are the least interesting and the most insipid. No one wants to know about their private lives. Only two things create a scandal here: corruption and drugs. Then it takes on gigantic proportions and gets wall-to-wall coverage because there’s absolutely nothing else of interest in the newspapers.

Does anyone care if they have lovers, go to brothels, or come out as gay? No. They continue doing what they were elected to do, and as long as they don’t blow the national budget, we all live in peace.

The president of the country changes every year (yes, every year) and is chosen not by the people, but by the Federal Council, a body comprising seven ministers who serve as Switzerland’s collective head of state. Every time I walk past the museum, I see endless posters calling for more plebiscites.

The Swiss love to make decisions—the color of our trash bags (black came out on top), the right (or not) to carry arms (Switzerland has one of the highest gun-ownership rates in the world), the number of minarets that can be built in the country (four), and whether or not to provide asylum for expatriates (I haven’t kept pace with this one, but I imagine the law was approved and is already in force).

“Excuse me, sir.”

We’ve been interrupted once already. He politely asks his assistant to postpone his next appointment. My newspaper is the most important in French-speaking Switzerland and this interview could prove crucial for the upcoming elections.

He pretends to convince me and I pretend to believe him.

Then I get up, thank him, and say that I have all the material I need.

“You don’t need anything else?”

Of course I do, but it’s not up to me to tell him what.

“How about getting together after work?”

I explain that I have to pick up my children from school, hoping that he sees the large gold wedding ring on my finger declaring: “Look, the past is the past.”

“Of course. Well, maybe we can have lunch someday.”

I agree. Easily deceived, I think: Who knows, maybe he does have something of importance to tell me, some state secret that will change the politics of the country and make the editor look at me with new eyes.

He goes over to the door, locks it, then comes back and kisses me. I return his kiss, because it’s been a long time. Jacob, whom I may have once loved, is now a family man, married to a professor. And I am a family woman, married to a man who, though he inherited his wealth, is extremely hardworking.

I consider pushing him away and saying that we’re not kids anymore, but I’m enjoying it. Not only did I discover a new Japanese restaurant, I’m having a bit of illicit fun as well. I’ve managed to break the rules and the world hasn’t caved in on me. I haven’t felt this happy in a long time.

I feel better and better, braver, freer. Then I do something I’ve dreamed of doing since I was in school.

Kneeling down, I unzip his fly and wrap my mouth around his penis. He grabs my hair and controls the rhythm of my head. He comes in less than a minute.

“God, that was good.”

I say nothing. The fact is that it was far better for me than for him, since he came so quickly.





SIN is followed by a fear of being caught.


On the way to the office, I buy a toothbrush and some toothpaste. Every half an hour or so, I go to the toilet to check that there’s nothing on my face or on my Versace shirt, intricately embroidered and perfect for hiding stains. I observe my work colleagues out of the corner of my eye, but no one has noticed (or at least none of the women, who have a special radar for these things).

Why did that happen? It was as if someone else had taken over and propelled me into a situation that was purely mechanical and non-erotic. Did I want to prove to Jacob that I’m independent, free, my own woman? Did I do that in order to impress him or in an attempt to escape what my girlfriend called “hell”?

Everything will continue as before. I’m not at any crossroads. I know where I’m going and hope that, with the passing of the years, I’ll manage to change my family’s ways so that we don’t end up thinking there’s anything special about washing the car. The really big changes happen over time, and time is something of which I have plenty.

At least I hope so.

When I get home, I try to look neither happy nor sad. The children notice at once.

“You’re acting funny today, Mom.”

I feel like saying: Yes, I did something I shouldn’t have done and yet I don’t feel the tiniest bit guilty, just afraid of being found out.

My husband gets home and, as usual, he kisses me, asks what kind of day I’ve had and what we’re having for supper. I give him the usual answers. If he doesn’t notice anything different about the routine, he won’t suspect that today I gave oral sex to a politician.

Which, it should be said, gave me no physical pleasure at all. But now I’m mad with desire, needing a man, needing to be kissed, and needing to feel the pain and pleasure of a body on top of mine.


When we go up to bed, I realize that I’m terribly aroused. I can’t wait to make love with my husband, but I must keep calm; if I’m too eager, he’ll suspect something is wrong.

After I shower, I lie down beside him, take the tablet he’s reading from his hands and put it on the bedside table. I begin stroking his chest, and he immediately becomes aroused. We make love as we haven’t done in a long time. When I moan a little too loudly, he asks me to keep the noise down so as not to wake the children, but I tell him I don’t want to, that I want to be able to express my feelings.

I have multiple orgasms. God, I love this man! We end up sweaty and exhausted, and so I decide to take another shower. He comes in with me and playfully turns the showerhead on my clit. I ask him to stop, saying I’m too tired, that we need to sleep and he’ll just get me all excited again.

While we’re drying each other off, I suggest going to a nightclub sometime—another attempt to change my routine at all costs. I think it’s then that he suspects something has changed.

“Tomorrow?”

I can’t tomorrow, I have my yoga class.

“Since you’ve brought it up, can I ask a direct question?”

My heart stops. He goes on:

“Why exactly do you go to yoga classes? You’re such a calm, well-balanced person, and a woman who knows what she wants. Aren’t you wasting your time?”

My heart starts beating again. I don’t answer. I simply smile and stroke his face.


I collapse onto the bed, close my eyes, and, before I fall asleep, think: I must be having the kind of crisis that comes after ten years of marriage. It’ll pass.

Not everyone needs to feel happy all the time. Besides, no one can be happy all the time. I need to learn to deal with the reality of life.

Dear Depression, please keep your distance. Don’t be nasty. Find some other person with more reason than me to look in the mirror and say: “What a pointless existence.” Whether you like it or not, I know how to defeat you. You’re wasting your time.





MY LUNCH with Jacob König goes exactly as I imagine. We meet at La Perle du Lac, an expensive restaurant on the lakeshore that used to be good but is now owned by the city. It’s still expensive, but the food is awful. I could have surprised him and taken him to the Japanese restaurant, but I know he would think it was in bad taste. For some people, décor matters more than food.


And now I see that I made the right decision. He tries to show me that he’s a wine connoisseur; he talks about “bouquet,” “texture,” and “legs,” the oily drops that fall in rivulets down the side of the glass. In truth, he’s telling me that he’s grown up and no longer a schoolboy; that he’s learned how to behave and has risen in the world; that he knows about life, wine, politics, women, and ex-girlfriends.

What nonsense! We’ve been drinking wine all our lives. We can tell a good wine from a bad one, and that’s all there is to it. Until I met my husband, all the men I went out with—men who considered themselves “cultivated”—acted as if the choice of wine in a restaurant was their big moment. They all did the same thing: with great solemnity, they sniffed the cork, read the label, allowed the waiter to pour a little into the glass, turned it this way and that, held it up to the light, smelled the wine, rolled it around in their mouth, swallowed, and, finally, gave an approving nod.

After witnessing the same scene endless times, I decided to change my group of friends and join the college’s nerds and social outcasts. Unlike the fake, predictable tasters of wine, the nerds were at least real and made no attempt to impress me. They joked about things I didn’t understand. They thought, for example, that I really ought to know the name Intel because “it’s written on every computer.” I, of course, had never noticed.

The nerds made me feel like a plain-Jane ignoramus, and were more interested in pirating things on the Internet than they were in my breasts or legs. As I got older, I returned to the safe embrace of the wine tasters until I found a man who didn’t try to impress me with his sophistication or make me feel like a complete idiot with conversations about mysterious planets, hobbits, or computer programs that erase all traces of the webpages you’ve visited. After a few months of going out, during which we discovered at least one hundred and twenty villages around Lake Léman, he asked me to marry him.

I accepted without hesitation.

I ask Jacob if he knows any nightclubs, because I haven’t kept up with Geneva’s nightlife (“nightlife” being just a manner of speaking) and I’ve decided to go out dancing and drinking. His eyes shine.

“I don’t have time for that. Thanks for the invitation, but, you know, apart from the fact that I’m married, I can’t be seen out with a journalist. People will say your articles are …”

“Biased.”

“Yes, biased.”

I decide to take this little game of seduction a step further—it’s a game that has always amused me. What have I got to lose? I know all the methods, diversions, traps, and objectives.

I ask him to tell me more about himself, about his personal life. I’m not here as a journalist, I say, but as a woman and a former girlfriend.

I stress the word “woman.”

“I don’t have a personal life,” he says. “I can’t, unfortunately. I’ve chosen a career that has transformed me into an automaton. Everything I say is scrutinized, questioned, published.”

This isn’t quite true, but I find his sincerity disarming. I know that he’s mostly seeing how the land lies, that he wants to know precisely where he’s putting his feet and how far he can go. He suggests that he is “unhappily married,” and goes into an exhaustive explanation of how powerful he is, just like all men of a certain age once they’ve hit the wine.

“In the last two years I’ve had a few months of happiness, a few of difficulties, but most are just a matter of hanging in there and trying to please everyone in order to be reelected. I’ve had to give up everything that I used to enjoy—like going dancing with you, for example. Or listening to music for hours, smoking, or doing anything that other people deem to be wrong.” That’s absurd! No one cares about his personal life.

“Perhaps it’s the return of Saturn. Every twenty-nine years the planet returns to the same point in the sky that it occupied at the moment of our birth.”

The return of Saturn?

He realizes that he’s said more than he should, and suggests that it might be best if we went back to work.

No, my Saturn return has already happened. I need to know exactly what it means. He gives me a lesson in astrology: Saturn takes twenty-nine years to return to the point in the sky where it was at the moment we were born. Until that happens, everything seems possible, our dreams can come true, and any walls hemming us in can still be broken down. When Saturn completes this cycle, it puts an end to any romanticism. Choices become definitive and it’s nearly impossible to change direction.

“I’m not an expert, of course, but my next chance will only come when I’m fifty-eight and Saturn returns again. Although, if Saturn is telling me it’s no longer possible to choose another path, why, then, did you invite me to lunch?”

We’ve been talking now for almost an hour.

“Are you happy?” he asks suddenly.

What?

“There’s something in your eyes, a sadness I find inexplicable in a pretty woman like you with a nice husband and a good job. It’s like seeing a reflection of my own eyes. I’ll ask you again: Are you happy?”

In this country where I was born and raised, and where I’m now raising my own children, no one asks that kind of question. Happiness is not something that can be precisely measured, discussed in plebiscites, or analyzed by specialists. We don’t even ask what kind of car someone drives, let alone something so personal and impossible to define.

“There’s no need to answer. Your silence says it all.”

No, my silence doesn’t say it all. It isn’t an answer. It merely reflects my surprise and confusion.

“I’m not happy,” he says. “I have everything a man could dream of, but I’m not happy.”

Has someone put something in the water? Are they trying to destroy my country with a chemical weapon designed to create a sense of profound frustration? Why is it that everyone I talk to feels the same?

So far I haven’t said anything. But tormented souls have this incredible ability to recognize and approach one another, thus compounding their grief.

Why hadn’t I noticed this in him? Why did I see only the superficial way he talked about politics or the pedantic way he tasted the wine?

The return of Saturn. Opposition. Unhappiness. Things I never expected to hear Jacob König say.

At that precise moment—it’s 1:55 p.m., according to my watch—I fall in love with him all over again. No one, not even my marvelous husband, has ever asked if I’m happy. Perhaps in my childhood, my parents and my grandparents asked that question, but no one has since.

“Shall we meet again?”

I no longer see a boyfriend from my adolescence sitting in front of me, but an abyss that I’m blithely walking toward, an abyss from which I have no desire to escape. The thought flashes through my mind that my sleepless nights are about to become even more unbearable now that I really do have a problem: a heart in love.

The red lights in my mind start to flash.

I tell myself: You’re a fool, he just wants to get you into bed. He doesn’t care about your happiness.

Then, in an almost suicidal gesture, I say yes. Perhaps going to bed with someone who just touched my breasts when we were teenagers will be good for my marriage, as it was yesterday, when I gave him oral sex in the morning and had multiple orgasms with my husband later that night.

I try to get back to the subject of Saturn, but he’s already asked for the bill and is talking on his cell phone, saying that he’ll be five minutes late.

“Ask them if they’d like a glass of water or some coffee,” he says.

I ask who he was talking to, and he says it was his wife. The director of a large pharmaceutical company wants to meet and possibly invest money in the final phase of his campaign to be elected to the Council of States. The elections are fast approaching.

Again, I remember that he’s married. That he’s unhappy. That he can’t do anything he enjoys. That there are rumors about him and his wife, that they have an open marriage. I need to forget the spark that dazzled me at 1:55 and realize that he just wants to use me.

This doesn’t bother me, as long as things are clear. I, too, need someone to sleep with.


We pause on the sidewalk outside the restaurant. He looks around as if we make a highly suspicious couple. Then, when he’s sure no one is looking, he lights a cigarette.

So that’s what he was afraid people might see: the cigarette.

“As I’m sure you remember, I was considered the most promising student of our year,” he says. “And of course I had to prove them right, what with my need for love and approval. I sacrificed nights out with my friends to study and meet other people’s expectations. I finished high school with brilliant results. By the way, why did we stop going out again?”

I have no idea, either. I think at the time everyone was simply busy hooking up with everyone else, and no one stayed with anyone for very long.

“I graduated from university, became a defense lawyer, and spent my life between crooks and the completely innocent, between scoundrels and the totally honest. What started out as a temporary job became a permanent decision: a need to help. My list of clients grew and grew. My reputation spread throughout the city. My father insisted that it was time for me to give it all up and go and work in the law practice of a friend of his, but I was just too excited by each new case I won. Then I came across a completely archaic law that has absolutely no relevance today. We needed major changes in how the city was governed.”

All this is in his official biography, but hearing it from his lips feels quite different.

“At one point, I decided I wanted to stand as a candidate for deputy. We campaigned with almost no money, because my father was completely opposed. But my clients were all in favor. I was elected by a tiny majority, but I was elected nonetheless.”

He looks around again, having hidden the cigarette behind his back. But since no one is looking, he takes another long drag. His eyes have a vacant look as he gazes back at the past.

“When I started out in politics, I used to sleep only about five hours a night, yet I was always full of energy. Now I can easily sleep for eighteen hours at a stretch. The honeymoon is over. All that’s left is my need to please others, especially my wife, who has fought like crazy for me to have a great future. Marianne has made a lot of sacrifices and I can’t let her down.”

Is this the same man who, only a few minutes ago, suggested that we start going out again? Or is this what he wants: someone to talk to who will understand him because she feels the same way?

I have a gift for inventing fantasies with extraordinary speed. I’m already imagining myself lying between silk sheets in some chalet in the Alps.

“So when shall we meet again?” he asks.

It’s up to you, I say.

He suggests meeting on another day. I tell him that’s when I have my yoga class. He asks me to skip it. But I’m always skipping it and have promised to be more disciplined.

Jacob seems resigned. I’m tempted to change my mind, but I mustn’t appear too eager or too available.

Life is becoming fun again, my previous apathy replaced by fear. How wonderful it is to be afraid of missing an opportunity!

I tell him it’s impossible, and that we’d better rearrange it for Friday. He accepts, phones his assistant, and asks him to put it in the diary. He finishes smoking his cigarette and says good-bye. I don’t ask him why he’s told me so much about his private life, and he adds nothing very significant to what he said in the restaurant.

I would like to believe that something has changed during that lunch, just one among hundreds I’ve had where I eat extremely unhealthy food and pretend to drink wine that remains almost untouched when the time comes to order coffee. One can never lower one’s guard, despite all that fuss about tasting the wine.

The need to please everyone. Saturn in opposition.





JOURNALISM is not as glamorous as people think—it’s not all interviewing famous people, being invited to amazing places, brushing shoulders with power, money, the fascinating world of criminality.


The fact is that we spend most of the time at our cubicle desks, talking on the phone. Privacy is only for the bosses, sitting in their glass aquariums, with curtains that can be occasionally closed. When they draw them, they still know what’s going on outside, but we can no longer see their fish mouths moving.

Being a journalist in Geneva, with its 195,000 inhabitants, is the most boring job in the world. I glance through today’s issue even though I already know what it contains—endless reports on foreign dignitary meetings at the United Nations, the usual complaints about the end to banking secrecy, and a few more things that have made it to the front page: “Morbidly Obese Man Banned from Plane,” “Wolf Decimates Sheep on Outskirts of City,” “Pre-Columbian Fossils Found in Saint-Georges,” and, finally, in banner headlines, “Newly Restored Genève Returns to the Lake Looking More Beautiful Than Ever.”

My boss summons me to his office and asks if I managed to get an exclusive out of my lunch with that politician. Needless to say, someone saw us together.

No, I didn’t. Nothing that isn’t in his official biography. The lunch was intended to get me closer to a source. (The more sources a journalist has, the more respected he or she is.)

My boss says that another reliable source has told him that, even though Jacob König is married, he’s having an affair with the wife of another politician. I feel a pang in that dark corner of my soul where depression keeps knocking but I refuse to answer.

My boss asks if I can get closer. They’re not particularly interested in his sex life, but his source suggests that König might be being blackmailed. A foreign metallurgical company wants to airbrush out certain tax problems in its own country, but has no way of getting in touch with the minister of finance. They need a little help.

My boss explains that Jacob König isn’t our target; what we want is to denounce the people who are trying to corrupt our political system.

“And that shouldn’t be difficult. We just have to say we’re on his side.”

Switzerland is one of the few countries in the world where a man’s word is still his bond. In most other places you need lawyers, witnesses, signed documents, and the threat of legal process if the secret were leaked.

“We just need confirmation and photos.”

So I’ll need to get closer to him.

“That shouldn’t be difficult, either. Our sources tell us that you’ve already arranged another meeting. It’s in his diary.”

And this is the land of banking secrecy! Everyone knows everything.

“Use the usual tactics.”

The “usual tactics” consist of four points: One, ask about something that the interviewee would like to discuss in public. Two, let him talk for as long as possible to make him think that the newspaper is going to give him lots of space. Three, at the end of the interview, when he’s convinced he has us nicely under control, ask the one question that really interests us. That way, he’ll feel that if he doesn’t answer it, we won’t give him the space he’s hoping for and he will have wasted his time. And four, if he responds evasively, reformulate the question and ask it again. He’ll say it’s of no interest, but you must get some answer, at least one statement. In ninety-nine percent of the cases, the interviewee falls into the trap.

That’s all you need. You can throw the rest of the interview away and use that one statement in an article that isn’t about the interviewee, but instead about an important subject featuring journalistic research, official facts, unofficial facts, anonymous sources, et cetera.

“If he proves reluctant, tell him we’re on his side. You know how journalism works. And it will be to your advantage, too …”

Yes, I know how it works. The career of a journalist is as short as an athlete’s. We achieve power and glory early, then step aside for the next generation. Very few continue and progress. Most see their standard of living drop and become critics of the press, writing blogs, giving talks, and spending more time than necessary trying to impress their friends. There is no intermediate stage.

I’m still in the category of “promising professional.” If I can get those statements, it’s likely that next year I won’t have to hear someone say “We’ve got to cut costs” and “With your talent and your name, you won’t have any trouble finding another job.”

And if I’m promoted? I’ll be able to decide what goes on the front page: Should it be the problem of the sheep-eating wolf, the exodus of foreign bankers to Dubai and Singapore, or the ridiculous lack of properties for rent? What a thrilling way to spend the next five years …

I go back to my desk, make a few unimportant phone calls, and read everything of interest on various websites. My colleagues are doing the same thing, desperate to find some bit of news that will stop our plummeting sales figures. Someone says that wild boar have been found on the railway line linking Geneva and Zurich. Can I get an article out of that?

Of course. Just as I can out of the phone call I receive from an eighty-year-old woman protesting about the law banning smoking in bars. She says that in summer it’s no problem, but in winter we’ll have more people dying of pneumonia than of lung cancer because smokers will all be obliged to smoke outside.

What am I doing working at this newspaper?

I know: we love our work and we want to save the world.





SITTING in the lotus position, with incense burning and elevator music playing, I begin my “meditation.” People have been advising me to try it for ages. That was when they thought I was just “stressed.” (I was stressed, but at least that was better than feeling completely indifferent about life.)


“Thoughts will come into your mind. Don’t worry. Accept those thoughts, don’t try to get rid of them.”

Perfect, that’s what I’m doing. I drive away toxic emotions like pride, disillusion, jealousy, ingratitude, futility. I fill that space with humility, gratitude, understanding, consciousness, and grace.

I think I’ve been eating too much sugar, which is bad for your health and for the spiritual body.

I leave aside darkness and despair and invoke the forces of good and of light.

I remember every detail of my lunch with Jacob.

I chant a mantra along with the other pupils.

I wonder if my boss is right. Is Jacob being unfaithful to his wife? Is he being blackmailed?

The teacher asks us to imagine ourselves surrounded by an armor made of light.

“We should live each and every day with the certainty that this armor will protect us from danger, and then we will no longer be bound to the duality of existence. We have to find a middle path, where there is neither joy nor suffering, only profound peace.”

I’m beginning to understand why I keep skipping my yoga classes. Duality of existence? A middle path? That sounds as unnatural as keeping my cholesterol level at seventy like my doctor is always telling me I should.

The image of the armor lasts only a few seconds before it’s shattered into a thousand pieces and replaced by the absolute certainty that Jacob likes any pretty woman who comes anywhere near him. So why am I bothering with him at all?

The exercises continue. We change posture, and the teacher insists, as she does during every class, that we should try, at least for a few seconds, to “empty our minds.”

Emptiness is precisely the thing I fear most and the thing that troubles me most. If she knew what she was asking … But then who am I to judge a technique that has lasted for centuries?

What am I doing here?

I know: “De-stressing.”





I WAKE up again in the middle of the night. I go to the children’s bedrooms to see if everything is all right—it’s a bit obsessive, but surely something all parents do now and then.


I go back to bed and lie staring up at the ceiling.

I don’t have the strength to say what I do or don’t want to do. Why don’t I just give up yoga once and for all? Why don’t I go to a psychiatrist and start taking those magic pills? Why can’t I control myself and stop thinking about Jacob? After all, he never suggested he wanted anything more than someone to talk to about Saturn and the frustrations that all adults face sooner or later.

I can’t stand myself any longer. My life is like a film endlessly repeating the same scene.

I took a few classes in psychology when I was studying journalism. In one of them, the professor—a very interesting man, both in class and in bed—said that all interviewees go through five stages: defensiveness, self-promotion, self-confidence, confession, and an attempt to put things right.

In my life, I’ve gone straight from self-confidence to confession. I’m starting to confess things to myself that would be best left unspoken.

For example: the world has stopped.

Not just my world, but the world of everyone around me. When we meet with friends, we always talk about the same things and the same people. The conversations seem new, but it’s all just a waste of time and energy. We’re trying to prove that life is still interesting.

Everyone is trying to control their own unhappiness. Not just Jacob and me, but probably my husband, too. Only he doesn’t show it.

In my dangerous confessional state, these things are beginning to become much clearer. I don’t feel alone. I’m surrounded by people with the same problems, all of whom are pretending that life is going on as normal. Me. My neighbor. Probably even my boss, as well, and the man sleeping by my side.

After a certain age, we put on a mask of confidence and certainty. In time, that mask gets stuck to our face and we can’t remove it.

As children, we learn that if we cry we’ll receive affection, that if we show we’re sad, we’ll be consoled. If we can’t get what we want with a smile, then we can surely do so with our tears.

But we no longer cry, except in the bathroom when no one is listening. Nor do we smile at anyone other than our children. We don’t show our feelings because people might think we’re vulnerable and take advantage of us.

Sleep is the best remedy.





I MEET Jacob as arranged. This time, I choose the place, and we end up in the lovely but neglected Parc des Eaux-Vives, where there’s another awful restaurant owned by the city. I once had lunch there with a correspondent from the Financial Times. We ordered martinis and the waiter served us Cinzanos.


This time, we don’t have lunch in the restaurant, we just sit on the grass and eat sandwiches. He can smoke freely here, because we have a private view of everything around us. We can watch the people coming and going.

I’ve decided to be honest: after the usual formalities (the weather, work, a “how was the nightclub?”/“I’m going tonight” exchange), the first thing I ask is whether he’s being blackmailed because of, how shall I say, an extramarital relationship.

He doesn’t seem surprised. He merely asks if I’m speaking as a journalist or as a friend.

At the moment, as a journalist. If you say it’s true, I give you my word that the newspaper will support you. We won’t publish anything about your personal life, but we will go after the blackmailers.

“Yes, I had an affair with the wife of a friend, which I imagine you already know. He was the one who encouraged it, because we were both bored with our marriages. Do you understand what I’m saying?”

The husband encouraged it? No, I don’t understand, but I nod and remember what happened three nights ago, when I had multiple orgasms.

And is the affair still ongoing?

“No, we lost interest. My wife knows about it. There are some things you can’t hide. Some people in Nigeria photographed us together and are threatening to publish the pictures, but that’s not news to anyone.”

Nigeria is where that metallurgical company is based. Didn’t his wife threaten divorce?

“She was pretty annoyed for a few days, but no more than that. She has great plans for our marriage, and I imagine that fidelity isn’t necessarily part of them. She pretended to be a bit jealous, just to show that what happened was important, but she’s a terrible actress. A few hours after I’d confessed, her mind was already on other things.”

It would seem that Jacob lives in a completely different world from mine, where wives don’t feel jealous and husbands encourage their wives to have affairs. Am I missing out?

“Time heals everything, don’t you think?”

That depends. Time can often make things worse. That’s what’s happening with me, but I came here to interview, not to be interviewed, so I don’t say anything. He goes on:

“The Nigerians don’t know this. I’ve set a trap for them with the Ministry of Finance and arranged to record everything, exactly as they did with me.”

At that point, I see my article go out the window, and along with it my big chance of rising up the ladder in a dying industry. There’s nothing new to be told—no adultery, no blackmail, no corruption. Everything is following the Swiss pattern of quality and excellence.

“Have you finished asking questions? Can we move on to another subject?”

Yes, I’ve asked all my questions, but I don’t really have another subject.

“I think you should have asked why I wanted to see you again. And why I wanted to know if you were happy. Do you think I’m interested in you sexually? We’re not teenagers anymore. I confess that I was surprised by what you did in my office, and I loved coming in your mouth, but that isn’t enough of a reason for why we are here, especially considering we can’t do that kind of thing in a public place. So don’t you want to know why I wanted to meet you again?”

The jack-in-the-box of that question about whether or not I’m happy springs out at me again. Doesn’t he realize that you don’t ask that kind of thing?

Only if you want to tell me, I reply, in order to provoke him and destroy, once and for all, that arrogant air of his that makes me feel so insecure. Then I add: It’s because you want to go to bed with me. You won’t be the first I’ve told “no.”

He shakes his head. I pretend to be unfazed and point at the waves on the normally calm surface of the lake below. We sit looking at them as if they were the most interesting thing in the world until he manages to find the right words:

“As you no doubt realized, I asked if you were happy because I recognized myself in you. Similarities attract. You may not feel the same about me, but that doesn’t matter. You may be mentally exhausted, convinced that your nonexistent problems—problems you know are nonexistent—are draining you of all your energy.”

I had that exact thought during lunch; tortured souls recognize each other and are drawn together in order to frighten the living.

“I feel the same,” he says. “Except that my problems are more real. Since I depend on the approval of so many people, I am filled with self-loathing when I haven’t resolved this or that problem. And that makes me feel useless. I’ve thought of seeking medical help, but my wife doesn’t want me to. She says that if anyone found out, it could ruin my career. I agree.”

So he talks about these things with his wife. Perhaps tonight I’ll do the same with my husband. Instead of going to a nightclub, I could sit down with him and tell him everything. How would he react?

“Of course, I’ve made a lot of mistakes,” he continues. “At the moment I’m trying to force myself to look at the world differently, but it’s not working. When I see someone like you—and I’ve met a lot of people in the same situation—I try to find out how they’re dealing with the problem. I need help, you see, and that’s the only way I can get it.”

So that’s it. No sex, no great romantic affair to bring a little sunshine into the gray Geneva afternoon. He just wants a support group, the kind of thing alcoholics and drug addicts have.

I get up.

I look him straight in the eye and say that I’m actually very happy, and that he should go to a psychiatrist. His wife can’t control everything in his life. Besides, medical confidentiality would guarantee that no one would find out. I have a friend who was cured by taking pills. Does he want to spend the rest of his life haunted by the specter of depression just to be reelected? Is that what he wants for his future?

He looks around to see if anyone is listening. I’ve already done that, and I know we’re alone apart from a group of drug dealers on the other side of the park, behind the restaurant. But they won’t bother us.

I can’t stop. The more I talk, the more I realize that I’m hearing myself and it’s helping. I say that negativity feeds on itself. He needs to look for something that will give him a little joy, like sailing, or going to the movies, or reading.

“No, that’s not it. You don’t understand.” He seems startled by my response.

I do understand. Every day we’re bombarded with information and images—with adolescents in heavy makeup pretending to be grown women as they advertise miraculous creams promising eternal beauty; with the story of an aging couple who climbed Mount Everest to celebrate their wedding anniversary; with new massage gizmos, and pharmacy windows that are chockablock with slimming products; with movies that give an entirely false impression of reality, and books promising fantastic results; with specialists who give advice about how to succeed in life or find inner peace. And all these things make us feel old, make us feel that we’re leading dull, unadventurous lives as our skin grows ever more flaccid, and the pounds pile on irrevocably. And yet we feel obliged to repress our emotions and our desires, because they don’t fit with what we call “maturity.”

Choose what information you listen to. Place a filter over your eyes and ears and allow in only things that won’t bring you down, because we have our day-to-day life to do that. Do you think I don’t get judged and criticized at work? Well, I do—a lot! But I’ve decided to hear only the things that encourage me to improve, the things that help me correct my mistakes. Otherwise, I will just pretend I can’t hear the other stuff or block it out.

I came here in search of a complicated story involving adultery, blackmail, and corruption. But you’ve dealt with it all in the best possible way. Can’t you see that?

Without thinking, I sit down again and grasp his head so that he can’t escape. I give him a long kiss. He hesitates for a fraction of a second, then responds. Immediately, all my feelings of impotence, fragility, failure, and insecurity are replaced by one of immense euphoria. From one moment to the next, I have suddenly become wise, I have regained control of the situation and dared to do something that before I could only imagine. I have ventured into unknown territory and dangerous waters, destroying pyramids and building sanctuaries.

I am once again the mistress of my thoughts and my actions. What seemed impossible this morning has become reality this afternoon. I can feel again, and I can love something I don’t possess. The wind has ceased to bother me and has become instead a blessing, like the caress of a god on my cheek. I have my soul back.

Hundreds of years seem to pass during the short time the kiss lasts. We separate slowly, and, as he gently strokes my hair, we look deep into each other’s eyes.

And we find exactly what was there before.

Sadness.

Now with the addition of a stupid, irresponsible gesture that, at least in my case, will only make matters worse.

We spend another half an hour together, talking about the city and its inhabitants as if nothing had happened. We seemed very close when we arrived at the park, and we became one when we kissed. Now, however, we are two complete strangers, trying to keep the conversation going just long enough so that we can each go our separate ways without too much embarrassment.

No one saw us—we’re not in a restaurant. Our marriages are safe.

I consider apologizing, but know it’s not necessary. After all, it was only a kiss.





I CAN’T honestly say that I feel victorious, but at least I’ve recovered some self-control. At home, everything carries on as usual; before I was in a terrible state, and now I’m feeling better. No one asks me how I am.


I’m going to follow Jacob König’s example and talk to my husband about my strange state of mind. I’ll confide in him, and I’m sure he’ll be able to help me.

On the other hand, I feel so good today; why spoil it by confessing to things I don’t even understand myself? I continue to struggle. I don’t believe that what I’m going through can be put down to a lack of chemical elements in my body, as I’ve read online about “compulsive sadness.”

I’m not sad today. It’s just one of those phases we all go through. I remember when my high-school class organized its farewell party; we laughed for two hours and then, at the end, we all sobbed because we knew we were parting forever. The sadness lasted for a few days or weeks, I can’t quite remember. But the mere fact that I don’t remember says something very important: it’s over. Turning thirty was hard, and perhaps I just wasn’t ready for it.

My husband goes upstairs to put the children to bed. I pour myself a glass of wine and go out into the garden.

It’s still windy. It’s a wind we know well here; it can blow for three, six, or even nine days. In France—a more romantic country than Switzerland—it’s known as the mistral and it always brings bright, cold weather. It’s high time these clouds went away. Tomorrow it will be sunny.

I keep thinking about the conversation in the park, that kiss. I feel no regrets at all. I did something I’d never done before, and that in itself has begun to break down the walls imprisoning me.

It doesn’t really matter what Jacob König thinks. I can’t spend my life trying to please other people.

I finish my glass of wine and refill it, and for the first time in many months, I feel something other than apathy or a sense of futility.

My husband comes downstairs dressed for a party and asks how long it will take me to get ready. I’d forgotten that we’d agreed to go dancing tonight.

I race upstairs, and when I come back down, I see that our Filipino babysitter has arrived and has already spread her books across the living-room table. The children are in bed asleep and shouldn’t be any trouble, and so she uses her time to study. She seems to have an aversion to television.

We’re ready to leave. I’ve put on my best dress, even at the risk of dressing to the nines for a laid-back party. What does it matter? I need to celebrate.





I WAKE to the sound of the wind rattling the windows. I blame my husband for not shutting them properly. I feel the need to get up and perform my nightly ritual of going into the children’s bedrooms to check that everything’s all right. And yet something stops me. Is it because I had too much to drink? I start to think about the waves I saw earlier at the lake, about the clouds that have now dissipated and the person who was with me. I remember very little about the nightclub; we both thought the music was horrible and the atmosphere extremely dull. It wasn’t long before we were back at our respective computers.


What about all those things I said to Jacob this afternoon? Shouldn’t I take a little time to think about them myself?

This room is suffocating me. My perfect husband is asleep beside me; he doesn’t seem to have heard the wind rattling the windows. I imagine Jacob lying beside his wife and telling her everything he feels (although I’m sure he won’t say anything about me). He’s relieved to have someone who can help him when he feels most alone. I don’t really believe what he said about her—if it were true, they would have separated. After all, they don’t have any children to worry about!

I wonder if the mistral has woken him up, too, and what he and his wife will talk about now. Where do they live? It wouldn’t be hard to find out. I can find out when I get in to work tomorrow. I wonder: Did they make love tonight? Did he take her passionately, did she moan with pleasure?

The way I behave with him is always a surprise. Oral sex, sensible advice, that kiss in the park. I seem like another person. Who is this woman I become whenever I’m with Jacob?

My provocative adolescent self. The one who was once as steady as a rock and as strong as the wind ruffling the calm waters of Lake Léman. It’s odd how whenever we meet up with old school friends, we always think they haven’t changed at all, even if the weakest has grown strong, the prettiest has ended up with a monster for a husband, and those who seemed closest have grown apart and not seen one another for years.

With Jacob, though, at least in the early stages of this reunion, I can still go back in time and be the young girl who isn’t afraid of consequences. She’s only sixteen, and the return of Saturn, which will bring maturity, is still a long way off.

I try to sleep, but I can’t. I spend an hour thinking about him obsessively. I remember my next-door neighbor washing his car and how I judged his life to be “pointless,” occupied by useless things. It’s not useless: he probably enjoys himself, taking the opportunity to get some exercise and see life’s simple things as blessings, not curses.

That’s what I need to do: relax a little and enjoy life more. I can’t keep thinking about Jacob. I am replacing my missing joy with something more concrete—a man—but that’s not the point. If I went to a psychiatrist, he’d tell me that this isn’t my problem at all; instead, it’s a lack of lithium, low levels of serotonin, and so on. This didn’t begin with Jacob’s appearance on the scene, and it won’t end with his departure.

But I can’t forget him. My mind repeats the moment of that kiss over and over.

And I realize that my unconscious is transforming an imaginary problem into a real one. That’s what always happens. That’s how illnesses come about.

I never want to see that man again. He’s been sent by the devil to destabilize something that was already fragile. How could I fall in love so quickly with someone I don’t even know? And who says I’m in love? I’ve been having problems since the spring. If things were perfectly fine before that, I see no reason why they shouldn’t be again.

I repeat what I said before: It’s just a phase.

I need to stay focused and hold negativity at bay. Wasn’t that my advice to Jacob?

I must stand firm and wait for the crisis to pass. Otherwise, I run the risk of really falling in love, and of feeling permanently what I felt for only a fraction of a second when we had lunch together that first time. And if that happens, things won’t just happen inside me. No, the suffering and pain will spread everywhere.

I lie tossing and turning in bed for what feels like ages before I fall asleep. After what seems only a second, my husband wakes me up. It’s a bright day, the sky is blue, and the mistral is still blowing.





IT’S breakfast time,” my husband says. “I’d better go and get the kids up.”


Why don’t we swap roles for once? I suggest. You go to the kitchen and I’ll get the kids ready for school.

“Is that a challenge?” he asks. “If it is, you’re going to have the best breakfast you’ve had in years.”

No, it isn’t a challenge, I just want to change things around a bit. So, you don’t think the breakfast I make is good enough?

“Listen, it’s far too early for arguments. Last night we both had a bit too much to drink, and nightclubs really aren’t meant for people our age,” he says. “Anyway, okay, you go and get the children ready.”

He leaves before I can respond. I pick up my smartphone and check what things I have to do today.

I look down the list of commitments that can’t be put off. The longer the list, the more productive I consider my day to be. Many of the tasks are things I promised to do the day before or during the week, but which I haven’t yet done. That’s why the list keeps growing, until it makes me so nervous that I decide to scrap the whole thing and start again. And then I realize that nothing on the list is actually very important.

There’s something that isn’t on the list, though, something I’m definitely not going to forget: finding out where Jacob König lives and taking a moment to drive past his house.

When I go downstairs, the table is perfectly set with fruit salad, olive oil, cheese, whole-grain bread, yogurt, and plums. A copy of the newspaper I work for is placed discreetly to the left. My husband has long since given up reading print media and is consulting his iPad. Our oldest son asks what “blackmail” means. I can’t understand why he wants to know until I see the front page. There is a large photo of Jacob, one of many he must have sent to the press. He looks thoughtful, reflective. Next to the photo is the headline: “Deputy Reports Blackmail Attempt.”

I didn’t write the article. In fact, while I was at my meeting with Jacob, the editor-in-chief rang to say that I could cancel because they had received a communiqué from the Ministry of Finance and were working on the case. I explained that the meeting had already taken place, that it had happened more quickly than I’d expected and without any need for the “usual tactics.” I was then dispatched to a nearby neighborhood (which considers itself a “city” and even has a prefecture) whose grocery store was caught selling food that’s past its sell-by date. I talked to the owner of the store, to neighbors and friends of neighbors, something I’m sure our readers found made for a more interesting article than some political scandal. It also made the front page, but without the banner headlines. “Grocery Store Fined, No Reports of Food Poisoning.”

Seeing that photo of Jacob right there on our breakfast table troubles me deeply.

I tell my husband that we need to have a talk—tonight.

“We can leave the children with my mother and go to dinner somewhere, just the two of us,” he says. “I need to spend a bit of time with you as well, alone and without any terrible music blaring in our ears. How can people possibly like that?”





IT WAS a spring morning.


I was sitting in a corner of the playground that was usually deserted and studying the tiles on the school wall. I knew there was something wrong with me.

The other children all thought I acted “better than them,” and I never made any attempt to deny this. On the contrary. I made my mother keep buying me expensive clothes and taking me to school in her pricey foreign car.

But that day in the playground, I realized that I was alone, and might remain alone for the rest of my life. Even though I was only eight years old, it seemed like it was already too late to change and to prove to the other children that I was just like them.


Now, summer.

I was at secondary school, and the boys were always hitting on me, no matter how hard I tried to fend them off. The other girls were green with envy, but pretended not to be and were always hanging around and cozying up to me, hoping to pick up any rejects.

And I rejected almost everyone, because I knew that if anyone ever managed to enter my world, they would find nothing of interest. It was best to maintain an air of mystery with a hint of unattainable pleasures.

On my way home, I noticed a few mushrooms that had sprung up after the rain. They were perfect and intact because everyone knew they were poisonous. For a fraction of a second, I considered eating them. I wasn’t feeling particularly sad or particularly happy; I just wanted to get my parents’ attention.

I didn’t eat the mushrooms.


Now it’s the first day of autumn, the loveliest season of the year. Soon the leaves will change color and each tree will be different from all the others. On the way to the car park, I decide to take a slightly different route.

I stop in front of the school where I studied. The tile wall is still there. Nothing has changed, except for the fact that I’m no longer alone. In my mind are two men; one will never be mine, but I’ll have dinner tonight with the other one in some special, carefully chosen spot.

A bird flies across the sky, playing with the wind. It flies back and forth, rises and falls, its movements obeying some logic I cannot understand. Perhaps the only logic is that of having fun.


I am not a bird. I can’t spend my life playing like many of our friends, who have less money but who seem to spend their whole lives traveling or going to restaurants. I’ve tried to be like that, but I can’t. Thanks to my husband’s influence, I got the job I have now. I work, I fill my time, I feel useful and able to justify my existence. One day, my children will be proud of their mother, and my childhood friends will be more frustrated than ever, because I have managed to build something tangible while they have devoted themselves to looking after the house, the children, and their husband.

Perhaps they don’t have this need to impress other people. I do, and I can’t reject it, because it’s been a good influence on my life, driving me on. As long as I don’t take any unnecessary risks, of course. As long as I manage to preserve my world exactly as it is today.

As soon as I get to the office, I search through the government’s digital archives. It takes me less than a minute to find Jacob König’s address, as well as information about how much he earns, where he studied, the name of his wife, and where she works.





MY HUSBAND has chosen a restaurant halfway between my office and our house. We’ve been there before. I like the food, the wine, and the atmosphere, but I always feel that we eat better at home. I dine out only when my social life requires it, and, whenever I can, I avoid it. I love cooking. I love being with my family, feeling that I’m both protector and protected.


One of the tasks not on my to-do list this morning was “drive past Jacob König’s house.” I managed to resist the impulse. I have enough imaginary problems without adding the real problem of unrequited love. The feelings I had are long over. It won’t happen again. We can now proceed into a future of peace, hope, and prosperity.

“They say the owner has changed and the food isn’t quite as good,” says my husband.

It doesn’t matter. Restaurant food is always the same: too much butter, ostentatious presentation, and—because we live in one of the most expensive cities in the world—an exorbitant price for something that really isn’t worth it.

But eating out is a ritual. We are greeted by the headwaiter, who leads us to our usual table even though we haven’t been here for some time. He asks if we want the same wine (of course we do) and hands us the menu. I read it from beginning to end and choose the same thing as always. My husband opts for his traditional choice, roast lamb with lentils. The waiter comes to tell us about today’s chef’s specials: we listen politely, grunt appreciatively, then order.





The first glass of wine doesn’t need to be tasted and meticulously analyzed because we’ve been married for ten years. It goes down very quickly, among talk of work and complaints about the man who was supposed to come and fix the central heating but never turned up.

“And how are you getting on with that article about next Sunday’s elections?” my husband asks.

I’ve been commissioned to write about a question I find particularly interesting: Does the electorate have a right to scrutinize a politician’s private life? It’s a response to the news that a deputy is being blackmailed by Nigerians. Most of the people I interviewed said they don’t care. It’s not like it is in the United States, they say, and we’re proud of that.

We talk about other recent news items. The increase in the number of voters at the last election for the Council of States. The drivers working for Geneva’s public transport company, TPG, who are tired but happy with their work. A woman who was run over in a crosswalk. The train that broke down and blocked the line for more than two hours. And other such pointless topics.

I pour myself another glass of wine, without waiting for the appetizer and without asking my husband what his day was like. He listens politely to everything I’ve just said. He must be wondering what we’re doing here.

“You seem happier today,” he says after the waiter has brought our main course, and after I realize I’ve been talking nonstop for twenty minutes. “Has something special happened to cheer you up?”

If he’d asked that same question on the day I went to Parc des Eaux-Vives, I would have blushed and immediately come out with the string of excuses I’d saved up. But today has been another normal, tedious day despite my attempts to convince myself that I’m very important to the world.

“What was it you wanted to talk to me about?”

I take a sip from my third glass of wine and prepare to make a full confession. The waiter arrives and stops me just as I’m about to leap into the abyss. We exchange a few more meaningless words, wasting precious minutes of my life on pointless niceties.

My husband orders another bottle of wine. The waiter wishes us “bon appétit” and goes off to fetch the new bottle. Then I begin.

You’ll say that I need to see a doctor, but I don’t. I cope perfectly well with my work at home and in the office, but for some months now I’ve been feeling sad.

“You could have fooled me. Like I just said, you seem much happier.”

Of course. My sadness has become so routine that no one notices anymore. It’s really good to finally talk about it, but what I have to say runs deeper than that false happiness. I don’t sleep properly anymore. I feel I’m just being self-obsessed, trying to impress people as if I were a child. I cry alone in the shower for no reason. I’ve only really enjoyed making love once in many months, and you know what time I’m talking about. I thought perhaps I was going through a midlife crisis, but that isn’t enough of an explanation. I feel like I’m wasting my life, that one day I’ll look back and regret everything I’ve done, apart from having married you and having our lovely children.

“But isn’t that what matters most?”

For lots of people, yes. But it isn’t enough for me. It’s getting worse every day. When I finally finish my housework each evening, an endless dialogue starts in my head. I’m afraid of things changing, but at the same time I’m dying to experience something different. My thoughts keep repeating themselves uncontrollably. You don’t notice because you’re asleep. For example, did you notice the mistral last night rattling the windows?

“No, the windows were shut.”

That’s what I mean. Even a high wind that has blown thousands of times since we’ve been married is capable of waking me up. I notice when you turn over in bed and when you talk in your sleep. But please don’t take this personally—it seems like I’m surrounded by things that make no sense. Just to be clear, though: I love our children. I love you. I adore my work. But that only makes me feel worse, because I feel I’m being unfair to God, to life, to you.

He’s barely touched his food. It’s as if he were sitting opposite a complete stranger. But saying these words has already filled me with an enormous peace. My secret is out. The wine is having its effect. I am no longer alone. Thank you, Jacob König.

“Do you think you need to see a doctor?”

I don’t know. Even if I did, I don’t want to go down that road. I need to learn how to resolve my problems on my own.

“It must have been very difficult to keep all these emotions to yourself for so long. Thank you for telling me. But why didn’t you tell me before?”

Because it’s only now that things have become unbearable. I was thinking today about my childhood and teenage years. Does the root of all this lie there? I don’t think so, not unless my mind has been lying to me all these years, which I think is unlikely. I come from a normal family, I had a normal upbringing, I lead a normal life. What’s wrong with me?

I didn’t say anything before—I tell him, crying now—because I thought it would pass and I didn’t want to worry you.

“You’re definitely not crazy. I haven’t noticed any of this. You haven’t been particularly irritable, you haven’t lost weight, and if you can control your feelings that well, then there must be a way out of this.”

Why did he mention losing weight?

“I can ask our doctor to prescribe some tranquilizers to help you sleep. I’ll say they’re for me. I think that if you could sleep properly, then you would gradually regain control of your thoughts. Perhaps we should exercise more. The children would love it. We’re far too caught up in work, and that’s not good.”

I’m not that caught up in my work. Despite what you think, the idiotic articles I write help me keep my mind occupied and drive away the wild thoughts that overwhelm me as soon as I have nothing to do.

“But we do need more exercise, more time outdoors. To run until we drop with exhaustion. And perhaps we should invite friends round more often.”

That would be a complete nightmare! Having to talk and entertain people with a fixed smile on my lips, listening to their views on opera and traffic. Then, to top it all, having to clean up afterward.

“Let’s go to the Jura National Park this weekend. We haven’t been there for ages.”

The elections are this weekend. I’ll be on duty at the newspaper.

We eat in silence. The waiter has already been to our table twice to see if we’ve finished, but we haven’t even touched our plates. We make short work of the second bottle of wine. I can imagine what my husband’s thinking: “How can I help my wife? What can I do to make her happy?” Nothing. Nothing more than he’s doing already. I would hate it if he arrived home bearing a box of chocolates or a bouquet of flowers.

We conclude that he’s had too much to drink to drive home, so we’ll have to leave the car at the restaurant and fetch it tomorrow. I telephone my mother-in-law and ask if the children can sleep over. I’ll be there early tomorrow morning to take them to school.

“But what exactly is missing in your life?”

Please don’t ask me that. Because the answer is nothing. Nothing! If only I had some serious problem. I don’t know anyone who’s going through quite the same thing. Even a friend of mine, who spent years feeling depressed, is now getting treatment. I don’t think I need that, because I don’t have the symptoms she described. I don’t want to enter the dangerous territory of legal drugs. People might be angry, stressed, or grieving over a broken heart—and in the latter case, they might think they’re depressed and in need of medicines and drugs—but they’re not. They’re just suffering from a broken heart, and there have been broken hearts ever since the world began, ever since man discovered that mysterious thing called Love.

“If you don’t want to go and see a doctor, why don’t you do some research?”

I’ve tried. I’ve spent ages looking at psychology websites. I’ve devoted myself more seriously to yoga. Haven’t you noticed the books I’ve been bringing home lately? Did you think I’d suddenly become less literary and more spiritual?

No, I’m looking for an answer I can’t find. After reading about ten of those self-help books, I saw that they were leading nowhere. They have an immediate effect, but that effect stops as soon as I close the book. They’re just words, describing an ideal world that doesn’t exist, not even for the people who wrote them.

“But do you feel better now?”

Of course, but that isn’t the problem. I need to know who I’ve become, because I am that person. It’s not something external.

I can see that he’s trying desperately to help, but he’s as lost as I am. He keeps talking about symptoms, but that, I tell him, isn’t the problem. Everything is a symptom. Can you imagine a kind of spongy black hole?

“No.”

Well, that’s what it is.

He assures me that I will get out of this situation. I mustn’t judge myself. I mustn’t blame myself. He’s on my side.

“There’s light at the end of the tunnel.”

I’d like to believe you, but it’s as if my feet are stuck in concrete. Meanwhile, don’t worry, I’ll keep fighting. I’ve been fighting all these months. I’ve been in similar situations before, and they’ve always passed. One day I’ll wake up and all this will just be a bad dream. I really believe that.

He asks for the bill, he takes my hand, we call a taxi. Something has gotten better. Trusting the one you love always brings good results.





JACOB König, what are you doing in my bedroom, in my bed, and in my nightmares? You should be working. After all, it’s only three days until the elections for the Municipal Council and you’ve already wasted precious hours of your campaign having lunch with me at La Perle du Lac and talking in the Parc des Eaux-Vives.


Isn’t that enough? What are you doing in my dreams? I did exactly as you suggested; I talked to my husband, and I felt the love he feels for me. And afterward, when we made love more passionately than we have in a while, the feeling that happiness had been sucked out of my life disappeared completely.

Please go away. Tomorrow’s going to be a difficult day. I have to get up early to take the children to school, then go to the store, find somewhere to park, and think up something original to say about a very unoriginal topic—politics. Leave me alone, Jacob König.

I’m happily married. And you don’t even know that I’m thinking about you. I wish I had someone here with me tonight to tell me stories with happy endings, to sing a song that would send me to sleep. But no, all I can think of is you.

I’m losing control. It’s been a week since I saw you, but you’re still here.

If you don’t disappear, I’ll have to go to your house and have tea with you and your wife, to see with my own eyes how happy you are. To see that I don’t stand a chance, that you lied when you said you could see yourself reflected in me, that you consciously allowed me to bring the wound of that unsolicited kiss upon myself.

I hope you understand. I pray that you do, because even I can’t understand what it is that I’m asking.

I get up and go over to the computer, intending to Google “How to get your man.” Instead, I type in “depression.” I need to be absolutely clear about what’s happening.

I find a website with a self-diagnosis questionnaire titled “Find Out if You Have a Psychological Problem.” My response to most of the questions is “No.”

Result: “You’re going through a difficult time, but you are definitely not clinically depressed. There’s no need to go to a doctor.”

Isn’t that what I said? I knew it. I’m not ill. I’m just inventing all this to get some attention. Or am I deceiving myself, trying to make my life a little more interesting with problems? Problems require solutions and I can spend my hours, my days, my weeks, looking for them. Perhaps it might be a good idea, after all, if my husband asked our doctor to prescribe something to help me sleep. Perhaps it’s just the stress of work that’s making me so tense, especially since it is election time. I try so hard to be better than the others, both at work and in my personal life, and it’s not easy to balance the two.





TODAY is Saturday, the eve of the elections. I have a friend who says he hates weekends because when the stock market is closed he has no way to amuse himself.


My husband has persuaded me that we need to get out of the city. His argument is that the kids will enjoy a little trip, even if we can’t go away for the whole weekend because tomorrow I’m working.

He tells me to wear my jogging pants. I feel embarrassed going out like that, especially to visit Nyon, the ancient and glorious city that was once home to the Romans but now has fewer than twenty thousand inhabitants. I tell him that jogging pants are really something you wear closer to home, where it’s obvious that you’re intending to exercise, but he insists.

I don’t want to argue, so I do as he asks. I don’t want to argue with anyone about anything—not now. The less said, the better.

While I’m off to a picnic in a small town less than half an hour away, Jacob will be visiting voters, talking to aides and friends, and feeling nervous, perhaps a little stressed, but glad because something is happening in his life. Opinion polls in Switzerland don’t count for much, because here secrecy of the vote is taken very seriously; however, it seems likely that he’ll be reelected.

His wife must have spent a sleepless night, but for very different reasons from mine. She’ll be planning how to receive their friends after the result is officially announced. This morning she’ll be at the market in Rue de Rive, where, all week, stalls selling fruit and cheese and meat are set up right outside the Julius Baer Bank and the shop windows of Prada, Gucci, Armani, and other designer brands. She chooses the best of everything, without worrying about the cost. Then she might take her car and drive to Satigny to visit one of the many vineyards that are the pride of the region, to taste some of the new vintages, and to decide on something that will please those who really understand wine—as seems to be the case with her husband.

She will return home tired, but happy. Officially, Jacob is still campaigning, but why not get things ready for the evening? Oh, dear, now she realizes that she has less cheese than she thought! She gets in the car again and goes back to the market. Among the dozens of varieties on display, she chooses the cheeses that are the pride of the Canton of Vaud: Gruyère (all three varieties: mild, salé, and the most expensive of all, which takes nine to twelve months to mature), Tomme Vaudoise (soft and creamy, to be eaten in a fondue or on its own), and L’Etivaz (made from the milk of cows grazed in alpine pastures and prepared in the traditional way, in copper cauldrons, over open wood fires).

Is it worth popping in to one of the shops and buying something new to wear? Or would that appear ostentatious? Best to wear that Moschino outfit she bought in Milan when she accompanied her husband to a conference on labor laws.

And how will Jacob be feeling?

He phones his wife every hour to ask if he should say this or that, if it would be best to visit this street or that area, or if the Tribune de Genève has posted anything new on its website. He depends on her and her advice, offloads some of the tension that builds up with each visit he makes, and asks her about the strategy they drew up together and where he should go next. As he suggested during our conversation in the park, the only reason he stays in politics is so he doesn’t disappoint her. Even though he hates what he’s doing, love lends a unique quality to his efforts. If he continues on his brilliant path, he will one day be president of the republic. Admittedly, this doesn’t mean very much in Switzerland, because as we all know, the president changes every year and is elected by the Federal Council. But who wouldn’t like to say that her husband was president of Switzerland, otherwise known as the Swiss Confederation?

It will open doors, bring invitations to conferences in far-flung places. Some large company will appoint him to its board. The future of the Königs looks bright, while all that lies before me at this precise moment is the road and the prospect of a picnic while wearing a hideous pair of jogging pants.





THE FIRST thing we do is visit the Roman museum and then climb a small hill to see some ruins. Our children race around, laughing. Now that my husband knows everything, I feel relieved. I don’t need to pretend all the time.


“Let’s go and run round the lake.”

What about the kids?

My husband spots a couple family friends sitting on a nearby bench, eating ice cream with their children. “Should we ask them if our kids can join? We can buy them ice cream, too.”

Our friends are surprised to see us, but agree. Before we go down to the shore of Lake Léman—which all foreigners call Lake Geneva—he buys the ice cream for the children and asks them to stay with our friends while Mommy and Daddy go for a run. My son complains that he hasn’t got his iPad. My husband goes to the car and fetches the stupid thing. From that moment on, the screen will be the best possible nanny. They won’t budge until they’ve killed terrorists in games more suited to adults.


We start running. On one side are gardens; on the other, seagulls and sailboats making the most of the mistral. The wind didn’t stop on the third day, nor on the sixth. It must be nearing its ninth day, when it will disappear and take with it the blue sky and the good weather. We run along the track for fifteen minutes. We’ve left Nyon behind us and had better head back.

I haven’t exercised in ages. When we’ve been running for twenty minutes, I stop. I can’t go on. I’ll have to walk the rest of the way.

“Of course you can do it!” encourages my husband, jogging in place so as not to lose his rhythm. “Don’t stop, keep running.”

I bend forward, resting my hands on my knees. My heart is pounding; it’s the fault of all those sleepless nights. He keeps jogging circles round me.

“Come on, you can do it! It’s worse if you stop. Do it for me, for the kids. This isn’t just a way of getting some exercise, it’s reminding you that there’s a finish line and that you can’t give up halfway through.”

Is he talking about my “compulsive sadness”?

He stops jogging, takes my hands, and gently shakes me. I’m too tired to run, but I’m too tired to resist as well. I do as he asks. We run together for the remaining ten minutes.

I pass billboards for the various Council of States candidates, which I hadn’t noticed before. Among the photos is one of Jacob König, smiling at the camera.

I run more quickly. My husband is surprised and speeds up. We get there in seven minutes instead of ten. The children haven’t moved. Despite the beautiful surroundings—the mountains, the seagulls, the Alps in the distance—they have their eyes glued to the screen of that soul-sucking machine.

My husband goes to them, but I keep running. He watches me, surprised and happy. He must think his words have had an effect and are filling my body with the endorphins that fill our blood whenever we do some physical activity with a slight intensity, like when we run or have an orgasm. The hormones’ main effects are improving our mood, boosting our immune system, and fending off premature aging, but, above all, they provoke a feeling of euphoria and pleasure.

However, that isn’t what the endorphins are doing for me. They’re merely giving me the strength to carry on, to run as far as the horizon and leave everything behind. Why do I have to have such wonderful children? Why did I have to meet my husband and fall in love? If I hadn’t met him, I’d be a free woman now.

I’m mad. I should run straight to the nearest mental hospital, because these are not the kinds of things one should think. But I continue to think them.

I run for a few more minutes, then go back. Halfway, I’m terrified by the possibility that my wish for freedom will come true and I’ll find no one there when I go back to the park in Nyon.

But there they are, smiling at their loving mother and spouse. I embrace them all. I’m sweating, my body and mind dirty, but still I hold them close.

Despite what I feel. Or, rather, despite what I don’t feel.





YOU don’t choose your life; it chooses you. There’s no point asking why life has reserved certain joys or griefs, you just accept them and carry on.


We can’t choose our lives, but we can decide what to do with the joys or griefs we’re given.

That Sunday afternoon, I’m at the party headquarters doing my professional duty. I managed to convince my boss of this, and now I’m trying to convince myself. It’s a quarter to six and people are celebrating. Contrary to my fevered imaginings, none of the elected candidates will be holding a reception, and so I still won’t get a chance to go to the house of Jacob and Marianne König.

When I arrive, the first results are just coming in. More than forty-five percent of the electorate voted, which is a record. A female candidate came out on top, and Jacob came in an honorable third, which will give him the right to enter government if his party chooses him.

The main hall is decorated with yellow and green balloons. People have already started to drink, and some make the victory sign, perhaps hoping that tomorrow their picture will appear in the newspaper. But the photographers haven’t yet arrived; after all, it’s Sunday, and the weather is lovely.

Jacob spots me at once and immediately looks the other way, searching for someone with whom he can talk about matters that must, I imagine, be extraordinarily dull.

I need to work, or at least pretend to. I take out my digital recorder, a notebook, and a felt-tip pen. I walk back and forth, collecting statements such as “Now we can get that law on immigration through” or “The voters realize that they made the wrong choice last time and now they’ve voted me back in.”

The winner says: “It was the female vote that really counted for me.”

Léman Bleu, the local television station, has set up a studio in the main room, and its female political presenter—a vague object of desire for nine out of ten men there—is asking intelligent questions but receiving only the sound bites approved by the political aides.

At one point, Jacob König is called for an interview, and I try to get closer to hear what he’s saying. Someone blocks my path.

“Hello, I’m Madame König. Jacob has told me a lot about you.”

What a woman! Blond, blue-eyed, and wearing an elegant black cardigan with a red Hermès scarf, although that’s the only famous brand name I can spot. Her other clothes must have been made exclusively by the best couturier in Paris, whose name must be kept secret in order to avoid copycat designs.

I try not to look surprised.

Jacob told you about me? I did interview him, and, a few days later, we had lunch together. I know journalists aren’t supposed to have an opinion about their interviewees, but I think your husband is a brave man to have gone public about that blackmail attempt.

Marianne—or Mme König, as she introduced herself—pretends to be interested in what I’m saying. She must know more than she is letting on. Would Jacob have told her what happened during our meeting in the Parc des Eaux-Vives? Should I mention it?

The interview with Léman Bleu has just begun, but she doesn’t seem to be interested in listening to what her husband says. She probably knows it all by heart, anyway. She doubtless chose his pale blue shirt and gray tie, his beautifully cut flannel jacket, and the watch he’s wearing—not too expensive, to avoid appearing ostentatious, but not too cheap, either, to show a proper respect for one of the country’s main industries.

I ask if she has anything to say. She replies that as an assistant professor of philosophy at the University of Geneva, she would be delighted to comment, but as the wife of a reelected politician, that would be absurd.

It seems to me that she’s provoking me, and so I decide to pay her back in kind.

I say I admire her dignity. She knew her husband had had an affair with the wife of a friend and yet she didn’t create a scandal. Not even when it appeared in the newspapers just before the elections.

“Of course not. When it’s a matter of consensual sex without love, I’m in favor of open relationships.”

Is she insinuating something? I can’t quite look into the blue beacons that are her eyes. I notice only that she doesn’t wear much makeup. She doesn’t need to.

“In fact,” she says, “it was my idea to get an anonymous informer to tell the newspaper the week before the elections. People will soon forget a marital infidelity, but they’ll always remember his bravery at denouncing corruption even though it could have had serious repercussions for his family life.”

She laughs at that last bit and tells me that what she’s saying is strictly off the record, of course, and should not be published.

I say that according to the rules of journalism, people should request that something be kept off the record before they speak. The journalist can then agree or not. Asking afterward is like trying to stop a leaf that has fallen into the river and is already traveling wherever the waters choose to take it. The leaf can no longer make its own decisions.

“But you won’t repeat it, will you? I’m sure you don’t have the slightest interest in damaging my husband’s reputation.”

In less than five minutes of conversation, there is already evident hostility between us. Feeling embarrassed, I agree to treat her statement as off the record. She notes that on any similar occasion, she will ask first. She learns something new every minute. She gets closer and closer to her ambition every minute. Yes, her ambition, because Jacob said that he was unhappy with the life he leads.

She doesn’t take her eyes off me. I decide to resume my role as journalist and ask if she has anything more to add. Has she organized a party at home for close friends?

“Of course not! Imagine how much work that would be. Besides, he’s already been elected. You hold any parties and dinners before an election, to draw votes.”

Again, I feel like a complete imbecile, but I need to ask at least one other question.

Is Jacob happy?

And I see that I have hit home. Mme König gives me a condescending look and replies slowly, as if she were a teacher giving me a lesson:

“Of course he’s happy. Why on earth wouldn’t he be?”

This woman deserves to be drawn and quartered.

We are both interrupted at the same time—me by an aide wanting to introduce me to the winner, she by an acquaintance coming to offer his congratulations. It was a pleasure to meet her, I say, and am tempted to add that, on another occasion, I’d like to explore what she means by consensual sex with the wife of a friend—off the record, of course—but there’s no time. I give her my card should she ever need to contact me, but she does not reciprocate. Before I move away, however, she grabs my arm and, in front of the aide and the man who has come to congratulate her on her husband’s victory, says:

“I saw that mutual friend of ours who had lunch with my husband. I feel very sorry for her. She pretends to be strong, but she’s really very fragile. She pretends that she’s confident, but she spends all her time wondering what other people think of her and her work. She must be a very lonely person. As you know, my dear, we women have a very keen sixth sense when it comes to detecting anyone who is a threat to our relationship. Don’t you agree?”

Of course, I say, showing no emotion whatsoever. The aide looks impatient. The winner of the election is waiting for me.

“But she doesn’t have a hope in hell,” Marianne concludes.

Then she holds out her hand, which I dutifully shake, and she moves off without another word.





I SPEND the whole of Monday morning trying to call Jacob’s private mobile number. I never get through. I block his number, on the assumption that he has done the same with mine. I try ringing again, but still no luck.


I ring his aides. I’m told that he’s very busy after the elections, but I need to speak to him. I continue trying.

I adopt a strategy I often have to resort to: I use the phone of someone whose number will not be on his list of contacts.

The telephone rings twice and Jacob answers.

It’s me. I need to see you urgently.

Jacob replies politely and says that today is impossible, but he’ll call me back. He asks:

“Is this your new number?”

No, I borrowed it from someone because you weren’t answering my calls.

He laughs. I imagine he’s surrounded by people. He’s very good at pretending that he’s talking about something perfectly legitimate.

Someone took a photo of us in the park and is trying to blackmail me, I lie. I’ll say that it was all your fault, that you grabbed me. The people who elected you and thought that the last extramarital affair was a one-off will be disappointed. You may have been elected to the Council of States, but you could miss out on becoming a minister, I say.

“Are you feeling all right?”

Yes, I say, and hang up, but only after asking him to send me a text confirming where and when we should meet tomorrow.

I feel fine.

Why wouldn’t I? I finally have something to fill my boring life. And my sleepless nights will no longer be full of crazy thoughts: now I know what I want. I have an enemy to destroy and a goal to achieve.

A man.

It isn’t love (or is it?), but that doesn’t matter. My love belongs to me and I’m free to offer it to whomever I choose, even if it’s unrequited. Of course, it would be great if it were requited, but if not, who cares. I’m not going to give up digging this hole, because I know that there’s water down below. Fresh water.

I’m pleased by that last thought: I’m free to love anyone in the world. I can decide who without asking anyone’s permission. How many men have fallen in love with me in the past and not been loved in return? And yet they still sent me presents, courted me, accepted being humiliated in front of their friends. And they never became angry.

When they see me again, there is still a glimmer of failed conquest in their eyes. They will keep trying for the rest of their lives.

If they can act like that, why shouldn’t I do the same? It’s thrilling to fight for a love that’s entirely unrequited.

It might not be much fun. It might leave profound and lasting scars. But it’s interesting—especially for a person who, for years now, has been afraid of taking risks and who has begun to be terrified by the possibility that things might change without her being able to control them.

I’m not going to repress my feelings any longer. This challenge is my salvation.


Six months ago, we bought a new washing machine and had to change the plumbing in the laundry room. We had to change the flooring, too, and paint the walls. In the end, it looked far prettier than the kitchen.

To avoid an unfortunate contrast, we had to replace the kitchen. Then we noticed that the living room looked old and faded. So we redecorated the living room, which then looked more inviting than the study we hadn’t touched for ten years. So then we went to work on the study. Gradually, the refurbishment spread to the whole house.

I hope the same doesn’t happen to my life. I hope that the small things won’t lead to great transformations.





I SPEND quite a long time finding out more about Marianne, or Mme König, as she calls herself. She was born into a wealthy family, co-owners of one of the world’s largest pharmaceutical companies. In photos on the Internet she always looks very elegant, whether she’s at a social or sporting event. She’s never over- or underdressed for the occasion. She would never, like me, wear jogging pants to Nyon or a Versace dress to a nightclub full of youngsters.


It’s possible that she is the most enviable woman in Geneva and its environs. Not only is she heiress to a fortune and married to a promising politician, she also has her own career as an assistant professor of philosophy. She has written two theses, one of them—“Vulnerability and Psychosis Among the Retired” (published by Editions Université de Genève)—for her doctorate. And she’s had two essays published in the respected journal Les Rencontres, in whose pages Adorno and Piaget, among others, have also appeared. She has her own entry in the French Wikipedia, although it’s not often updated. There she is described as “an expert on aggression, conflict, and harassment in the nursing homes of French-speaking Switzerland.”

She must have a profound understanding of the agonies and ecstasies of being human—so profound that she was not even shocked by her husband’s “consensual sex.”

She must be a brilliant strategist to have succeeded in persuading a mainstream newspaper to believe in her, an anonymous informer. (They are normally never taken seriously and are, besides, few and far between in Switzerland.) I doubt that she identified herself as a source.

She is a manipulator who was able to transform something that could have proved devastating to her husband’s career into a lesson in marital tolerance and solidarity, as well as a struggle against corruption.

She is a visionary, intelligent enough to wait before having children. She still has time. Meanwhile, she can build the career she wants without being troubled by babies crying in the middle of the night or by neighbors saying that she should give up her work and pay more attention to the children (as mine do).

She has excellent instincts, and doesn’t see me as a threat. Despite appearances, the only person I am a danger to is myself.

She is precisely the kind of woman I would like to destroy pitilessly.

Because she is not some poor wretch without a resident’s permit who wakes at five in the morning in order to travel into the city, terrified that one day she’ll be exposed as an illegal worker. Because she isn’t a lady of leisure married to some high-ranking official in the United Nations, always seen at parties in order to show the world how rich and happy she is (even though everyone knows that her husband has a mistress ten years her junior). And because she isn’t the mistress of a high-ranking official at the United Nations, where she works and, however hard she tries, will never be recognized for what she does because “she’s having an affair with the boss.”

She isn’t a lonely, powerful female CEO who had to move to Geneva to be close to the World Trade Organization’s headquarters, where everyone takes sexual harassment in the workplace so seriously that no one dares to even look at anyone else. And at night, she doesn’t lie staring at the wall of the vast mansion she has rented, occasionally hiring a male escort to distract her and help her forget that she’ll spend the rest of her life without a husband, children, or lovers.

No, Marianne doesn’t fit any of those categories. She’s the complete woman.





I’VE BEEN sleeping better. I should be meeting Jacob before the end of the week—at least that’s what he promised, and I doubt he would have the courage to change his mind. He sounded nervous during our telephone conversation on Monday.


My husband thinks that the Saturday we spent in Nyon did me good. Little does he know that’s where I discovered what was really troubling me: a lack of passion and adventure.

One of the symptoms I’ve noticed in myself is a kind of psychological nearsightedness. My world, which once seemed so broad and full of possibilities, began to shrink as my need for security grew. Why could that be? It must be a quality we inherited from when our ancestors lived in caves. Groups provide protection; loners die.

Even though we know that the group can’t possibly control everything—for example, your hair falling out or a cell in your body that suddenly goes crazy and becomes a tumor—the false sense of security makes us forget this. The more clearly we can see the walls of our life, the better. Even if it’s only a psychological boundary, even if, deep down, we know that death will still enter without asking, it’s comforting to pretend that we have everything under control.

Lately, my mind has been as rough and tempestuous as the sea. When I look back now, it’s as if I am making a transoceanic voyage on a rudimentary raft, in the middle of the stormy season. Will I survive? I ask, now that there is no going back.

Of course I will.

I’ve survived storms before. I’ve also made a list of things to focus on whenever I feel I’m in danger of falling back into the black hole:


· Play with my children. Read them stories that provide a lesson for them and for me, because stories are ageless.

· Look up at the sky.

· Drink lots of iced mineral water. That may seem simple, but it always invigorates me.

· Cook. Cooking is the most beautiful and most complete of the arts. It involves all our five senses, plus one more—the need to give of our best. That is my preferred therapy.

· Write down a list of complaints. This was a real discovery! Every time I feel angry about something, I write it down. At the end of the day, when I read the list, I realize that I’ve been angry about nothing.

· Smile, even if I feel like crying. That is the most difficult thing on the list, but you get used to it. Buddhists say that a fixed smile, however false, lights up the soul.

· Take two showers a day, instead of one. It dries the skin because of the hard water and chlorine, but it’s worth it, because it washes the soul clean.


But this is working now only because I have a goal: to win the heart of a man. I’m a cornered tiger with nowhere to run; the only option that remains is to attack.





I FINALLY have a date: tomorrow at three o’clock in the restaurant of the Golf Club de Genève in Cologny. It could have been in a bistro in the city or in a bar on one of the roads that lead off from the city’s main (or you might say only) commercial street, but he chose the restaurant at the golf club.


In the middle of the afternoon.

Because at that hour, the restaurant will be empty and we’ll have more privacy. I need to come up with a good excuse for my boss, but that’s not a problem. After all, the article I wrote about the elections was picked up by lots of other newspapers.

A discreet place, that’s what he must have had in mind. But in my usual mania for believing whatever I want, I think of it as romantic. Autumn has already painted the trees many shades of gold; perhaps I’ll invite Jacob to go for a walk. I think better when I’m moving, especially when I run, as proven in Nyon, but I doubt very much that we’ll do any running.

Ha, ha, ha.

Tonight for dinner we had a cheese fondue that we Swiss call raclette, accompanied by thin slices of raw bison meat and traditional rösti potatoes with cream. My family asked if we were celebrating something special, and I said that we were: the fact that we were together and could enjoy a quiet dinner in one another’s company. Then I took my second shower of the day and allowed the water to wash away my anxiety. Afterward, I slathered on plenty of moisturizer and went to the children’s bedroom to read them a story. I found them glued to their tablets, which I think should be forbidden for anyone under fifteen.

I told them to turn their electronics off, and they reluctantly obeyed. I picked up a book of traditional stories, opened it at random, and began to read.


During the ice age, many animals died of cold, so the porcupines decided to band together to provide one another with warmth and protection. But their spines or quills kept sticking into their surrounding companions, precisely those who provided the most warmth. And so they drifted apart again.

And again many of them died of cold.

They had to make a choice: either risk extinction or accept their fellow porcupines’ spines.

Very wisely, they decided to huddle together again. They learned to live with the minor wounds inflicted by their relatives, because the most important thing to their survival was that shared warmth.


The children want to know if they can see a real porcupine.

“Are there any at the zoo?”

I don’t know.

“What’s the ice age?”

A time when it was very, very cold.

“Like winter?”

Yes, but a winter that never ended.

“But why didn’t they remove their prickly spines before they snuggled up together?”

Oh, dear, I should have chosen another story. I turn out the light and decide to sing them to sleep with a traditional song from a village in the Alps, stroking their hair as I do so. They soon fall asleep.

My husband brings me some Valium. I’ve always refused to take any medicine because I’m afraid of becoming dependent, but I need to be in top form tomorrow.

I take a ten-milligram pill and fall into a deep, dreamless sleep. I don’t wake up all night.





I GET there early, and go straight to the clubhouse and out into the garden. I walk to the trees at the far end, determined to enjoy this lovely afternoon to the full.


Melancholy. That is always the first word that comes into my head when autumn arrives, because I know the summer is over. The days will grow shorter, and we don’t live in the charmed world of those ice-age porcupines; we can’t bear to be wounded by the sharp spines of others, even slightly.

We already hear about people in other countries dying of the cold, traffic jams on snowbound highways, airports closed. Fires are lit and blankets are brought out of cupboards. But that happens only in the world we humans create.

In nature, the landscape looks magnificent. The trees, which seemed so similar before, take on their own personalities and paint the forests in a thousand different shades. One part of the cycle of life is coming to an end. Everything will rest for a while and come back to life in the spring, in the form of flowers.

There is no better time than the autumn to begin forgetting the things that trouble us, allowing them to fall away like dried leaves. There is no better time to dance again, to make the most of every crumb of sunlight and warm body and soul with its rays before it falls asleep and becomes only a dim lightbulb in the skies.


I see him arrive. He looks for me in the restaurant and on the terrace, finally going over to the waiter at the bar, who points in my direction. Jacob has seen me now and waves. Slowly, I begin to walk back to the clubhouse. I want him to appreciate my dress, my shoes, my fashionable lightweight jacket, the way I walk. My heart may be pounding furiously, but I must keep cool.

I’m thinking about what words to use. What mysterious reason did I give for meeting again? Why hold back now when we know there’s something between us? Are we afraid of stumbling and falling, like we have before?

As I walk, I feel as if I were entering a tunnel I’ve never traveled before, one that leads from cynicism to passion, from irony to surrender.

What is he thinking as he watches me? Do I need to explain that we shouldn’t be frightened and that “if Evil exists, it’s to be found in our fears”?

Melancholy. The word is transforming me into a romantic and rejuvenating me with each step I take.

I keep thinking about what I should say when I reach his side. No, best not to think and just let the words flow naturally. They are inside me. I may not recognize or accept them, but they are more powerful than my need to control everything.

Why don’t I want to hear my own words before I say them to him?

Could it be fear? But what could be worse than living a sad, gray life, in which every day is the same? What could be worse than the fear that everything will disappear, including my own soul, and leave me completely alone in this world when I once had everything I needed to be happy?

I see the leaves falling, their shapes silhouetted against the sun. The same thing is happening inside me: with every step I take, another barrier falls, another defense is destroyed, another wall collapses, and my heart, hidden behind it all, is beginning to see and enjoy the autumn light.

What shall we talk about? About the music I heard in the car on the way here? About the wind rustling the trees? About the human condition with all its contradictions, both dark and redemptive?

We will talk about melancholy, and he’ll say that it’s a sad word. I’ll say, no, it’s nostalgic, it describes something forgotten and fragile, as we all are when we pretend we can’t see the path to which life has led us without asking our permission. When we deny our destiny because it’s leading us toward happiness, and all we want is security.

A few more steps, a few more fallen barriers. More light floods into my heart. It doesn’t even occur to me to try to control anything, only to experience this afternoon that will never be repeated. I don’t need to convince him of anything. If he doesn’t understand now, he will understand later. It’s simply a matter of time.

Despite the cold, we’ll sit out on the terrace so he can smoke. At first, he’ll be on the defensive, wanting to know about that photo taken in the park.

We will talk about the possibility of life on other planets and the presence of God, so often forgotten in the lives we lead. We will talk about faith, miracles, and meetings that were planned even before we were born.

We will discuss the eternal struggle between science and religion. We will talk about love, and how it’s always seen as both desirable and threatening. He will insist that my definition of melancholy is incorrect, but I will simply sip my tea in silence, watching the sun set behind the Jura Mountains and feeling happy to be alive.

Ah, yes, we will also talk about flowers, even if the only ones we can see are those decorating the bar inside, the ones that came from some vast greenhouse where they’re produced en masse. But it’s good to talk about flowers in the autumn. That gives us hope for the spring.

Only a few more feet. The walls have all fallen. I have just been reborn.


I reach his side, and we greet each other with the usual three kisses—right cheek, left cheek, right cheek, as demanded by Swiss tradition (although whenever I travel abroad, people are always surprised by that third kiss). I sense how nervous he is and suggest we stay out on the terrace; we’ll have more privacy there and he can smoke. The waiter knows him. Jacob orders a Campari and tonic, and I order tea, as planned.

To put him at his ease, I start talking about nature, about trees, and about how lovely it is to realize that everything is constantly changing. Why are we always trying to repeat the same pattern? It’s not possible. It’s unnatural. Wouldn’t it be better to see challenges as a source of knowledge, and not as our enemies?

He still seems nervous. He responds automatically, as if he wants to bring the conversation to a close, but I won’t let him. This is a unique day in my life and should be respected. I continue talking about the various thoughts that occurred to me while I was walking, the words for which I had no control. I’m astonished to see them emerge now with such precision.

I talk about pets and ask if he understands why people like them so much. Jacob gives a conventional answer and then I move on to the next subject: Why is it so difficult to accept that people are different? Why are there so many laws trying to create new tribes instead of simply accepting that cultural differences can make our lives richer and more interesting? But he says that he’s tired of talking about politics.

Then I tell him about the aquarium I saw at the school when I dropped my kids off that morning. Inside it was a fish, swimming round and round, and I said to myself: He can’t remember where he began, and he will never reach the end. That’s why we like fish in aquariums; they remind us of ourselves, well fed but incapable of moving beyond the glass walls.

He lights another cigarette. I see that there are already two cigarette butts in the ashtray. Then I realize that I’ve been talking for a very long time in a trance of light and peace without giving him a chance to express his feelings. What would he like to talk about?

“About that photo you mentioned,” he says cautiously, because he’s noticed that I’m in a particularly sensitive mood.

Ah, the photo. Of course it exists. It’s engraved on my heart and will be erased only when God chooses. But come in and see with your own eyes, because the barriers protecting my heart fell away as I was walking toward you.

Now, don’t tell me you don’t know the way, because you’ve entered several times before, in the past and the present. Yes, I found it hard to accept at first, too, and I understand that you might be reluctant. We’re the same, you and I. Don’t worry, I’ll lead you there.

After I have said all this, he delicately takes my hand, smiles, and then sticks in a knife:

“We’re not teenagers anymore. You’re a wonderful person and, as I understand, have a lovely family. Have you considered marriage counseling?”

For a moment, I feel disoriented. Then I get up and walk straight to my car. No tears. No good-byes. No looking back.





I FEEL nothing. I think nothing. I get straight into my car and drive, not knowing exactly where I should go. No one is waiting for me at the end of the journey. Melancholy has become apathy. I need to drag myself onward.


Five minutes later, I’m outside a castle. I know what happened here; someone breathed life into a monster that remains famous to this day, although few people know the name of the woman who created him.

The gate into the garden is closed, but so what? I can climb through the hedge. I sit on the cold bench and imagine what happened in 1817. I need to distract myself, to forget everything from before and concentrate on something different.

I imagine that year, when the castle’s tenant, the English poet Lord Byron, decided to live here in exile. He was hated in his own country, and also in Geneva, where he was accused of holding orgies and getting drunk in public. He must have been dying of boredom. Or melancholy. Or rage.

It doesn’t matter. What matters is that one day in 1817, two guests arrived from England: another poet, Percy Bysshe Shelley, and his nineteen-year-old wife, Mary. (A fourth guest joined them, but I can’t remember his name right now.)

They doubtless talked about literature. They doubtless complained about the weather, the rain, the cold, the inhabitants of Geneva, their English compatriots, the lack of tea and whiskey. Perhaps they read poems to one another and praised one another’s work.

They thought they were so special and so important that they decided to make a bet: they would return to that same place within a year, each with a book he had written describing the human condition.

Obviously, after the initial enthusiasm and conversation about how the human being is a complete aberration, they forgot about the bet.

Mary was present during that conversation. She wasn’t invited to participate, first, because she was a woman, and, even worse, because she was very young. And yet that conversation must have marked her deeply. Why did she not just write something to pass the time? She had a subject, she simply needed to develop it and keep the book to herself when she had finished it.

However, when they returned to England, Shelley read the manuscript and encouraged her to publish it. Further, since he was already famous, he decided to submit it to a publisher and write the preface himself. Mary resisted, but in the end agreed, with one condition: her name should not appear on the cover.

The initial print run of five hundred copies quickly sold out. Mary thought it must be because of Shelley’s preface, but, on the second edition, she agreed to allow her name to appear as author. Ever since, the book has remained a constant presence in bookshops around the world. It has inspired writers, theater directors, film directors, Halloween partiers, and those at masked balls. It was recently described by one well-known critic as “the most creative work of Romanticism and possibly of the last two hundred years.”

No one can explain why. Most people have never read it, but almost everyone has heard of it.

It tells the story of Victor, a Swiss scientist, born in Geneva and brought up by his parents to understand the world through science. While still a child, he sees a lightning bolt strike a tree and wonders if that is the source of life. Could man create another human being?

And like a modern version of Prometheus, the mythological figure who stole fire from the gods in order to help mankind (the author used The Modern Prometheus as her subtitle, but few remember this), he begins to work to try and replicate God’s greatest deed. Needless to say, despite all the care he takes, the experiment slides out of his control.

The title of the book: Frankenstein.


Dear God, of whom I think very little but in whom I trust in times of affliction, did I come here purely by chance? Or was it Your invisible and implacable hand that led me to this castle and reminded me of that story?

Mary met Shelley when she was fifteen. He was already married, but, undeterred by social conventions, she followed the man she considered the love of her life.

Fifteen! And she already knew exactly what she wanted. And knew how to get it, too. I’m in my thirties and wish for a different things every hour, but am incapable of fulfilling them … although I’m perfectly capable of walking through a romantic, melancholy autumn afternoon, thinking about what to say when the moment arrives.

I am not Mary Shelley. I’m Victor Frankenstein and his monster.

I tried to breathe life into something inanimate, and the result will be the same as in the book: spreading terror and destruction.

No more tears. No more despair. I feel as though my heart has given up beating. My body reacts accordingly, because I can’t move. It’s autumn, and the evening comes on quickly, the lovely sunset soon replaced by twilight. I’m still sitting here when night comes, looking at the castle and seeing its tenants scandalizing the bourgeoisie of Geneva at the beginning of the nineteenth century.

Where is the lightning bolt that brought the monster to life?

No bolt from out of the blue. The traffic, which isn’t very heavy in this area, anyway, grows still thinner. My children will be waiting for their dinner, and my husband—who knows the state I’m in—will soon start to worry. But it’s as if I have a ball and chain around my feet. I still can’t move.

I’m a loser.





SHOULD someone beg forgiveness for harboring an impossible Love?


No, certainly not.

Because God’s Love for us is also impossible. It’s never requited at the time, and yet He continues to love us. He loved us so much that He sent His only son to explain how Love is the force that moves the sun and all the stars. In one of his letters to the Corinthians (which we were made to learn by heart at school), Paul says:


Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.


And we all know why. We often hear what seem to be great ideas to transform the world, but they are words spoken without feeling, empty of Love. However logical and intelligent they might be, they do not touch us.

Paul compares Love with Prophecy, with knowledge of the Mysteries, and with Faith and Charity.

Why is Love more important than Faith?

Because Faith is merely the road that leads us to the Greater Love.

Why is Love more important than Charity?

Because Charity is only one of the manifestations of Love. And the whole is always more important than the part. And Charity is also only one of the many roads that Love uses to bring man closer to his fellow man.

And we all know that there is a lot of Charity out there without Love. Every week, a “charity ball” is held. People pay a fortune to buy a table, take part, and have fun in their jewels and their expensive clothes. We leave thinking that the world is a better place because of the amount of money collected for the homeless in Somalia, the refugees from Yemen, or the starving in Ethiopia. We stop feeling guilty about the cruel display of poverty, but we never ask ourselves where that money is going.

Those without the right contacts to go to a charity ball or those who can’t afford such extravagance will pass by a beggar and give him a coin. Fine. What could be easier than tossing a coin at a beggar in the street? It’s usually easier than not doing so.

What a sense of relief, and for just one coin! It’s cheap and solves the beggar’s problem.

However, if we really loved him, we would do a lot more for him.

Or we would do nothing. We wouldn’t give him that coin and—who knows?—our sense of guilt at such poverty might awaken real Love in us.

Paul then goes on to compare Love with sacrifice and martyrdom.

I understand his words better today. Even if I were the most successful woman in the world, even if I were more admired and more desired than Marianne König, it would be worth nothing if I had no Love in my heart. Nothing.

Whenever I interview artists or politicians, social workers or doctors, students or civil servants, I always ask: “What is your objective, your goal?” Some say: to start a family. Others say: to get on in my career. But when I probe deeper and ask again, the automatic response is: to make the world a better place.

I feel like going to the Mont Blanc Bridge in Geneva with a manifesto printed in letters of gold and handing it to every passing person and car. On it will be written:

I ask all those who hope to one day work for the good of humanity: never forget that even if you deliver up your body to be burned, you gain nothing if you have not Love. Nothing!

There is nothing more important we can give than the Love reflected in our own lives. That is the one universal language that allows us to speak Chinese or the dialects of India. When I was young, I traveled a lot—it was part of every student’s rite of passage. I visited countries both rich and poor. I did not usually speak the local language, but everywhere the silent eloquence of Love helped me make myself understood.

The message of Love is in the way I live my life, and not in my words or my deeds.

In the letter to the Corinthians, Paul tells us, in three short lines, that Love is made of many elements, like light. We learn at school that if we pick up a prism and allow a ray of light to pass through, that ray will divide into seven colors, those of the rainbow.

Paul shows us the rainbow of Love just as a prism reveals to us the rainbow of light.

And what are those elements? They are virtues we hear about every day and that we can practice in every moment.


Patience: Love is patient …



Kindness:… and kind.



Generosity: Love does not envy …



Humility:… or boast; it is not arrogant …



Courtesy:… or rude.



Unselfishness: It does not insist on its own way.



Good temper: It is not irritable … or resentful.



Guilelessness: or resentful.



Sincerity: It does not rejoice at wrongdoing, but rejoices with the truth.




All these gifts concern us, our daily lives, and today and tomorrow, not with Eternity.

The problem is that people tend to relate these traits to the Love of God, but how does God’s Love manifest itself? Through the Love of man.

To find Peace in the heavens, we must find love on Earth. Without it, we are worthless.

I love and no one can take that away from me. I love my husband, who always supports me. I think I also love another man, whom I met in my youth. And while I was walking toward him, one lovely autumn afternoon, I dropped all my defenses and cannot rebuild them. I’m vulnerable, but I don’t regret that.

This morning, when I was drinking a cup of coffee, I looked at the gentle light outside and remembered that walk, asking myself for the last time: Am I trying to create a real problem to drive away my imaginary ones? Am I really in love or have I simply transformed all the last month’s unpleasant feelings into a fantasy?

No. God would never be so unfair as to allow me to fall in love like that if there were not some possibility for that love being requited.

But sometimes Love demands that you fight for it. And that’s just what I will do. In the pursuit of justice, I have to ward off evil without exasperation or impatience. When Marianne is long gone and he is with me, Jacob will thank me for the rest of our lives.

Or he will leave again, but I will be left with the feeling that I fought as hard as I could.

I’m a new woman. I am pursuing something that won’t come to me of its own free will. He is married and believes any false move might compromise his career.

So what do I need to concentrate on? On undoing his marriage without him realizing it.





I AM going to meet my first drug dealer!


I live in a country that has decided to happily shut itself off from the world. When you decide to visit the villages around Geneva, one thing becomes immediately clear: there is nowhere to park, unless you can use an acquaintance’s garage.

The message is: don’t come here, outsiders, because the view of the lake below, the majestic Alps on the horizon, the wildflowers in the springtime, and the golden hue of the vineyards in autumn, all are the legacy of our ancestors who lived here completely undisturbed. And we want to keep it that way, outsiders, so don’t come here. Even if you were born and raised in the next city over, we are not interested in what you have to say. If you want to park your car, look for a big city, full of spaces for just that.

We are so isolated from the world that we still believe in the threat of major nuclear war. All Swiss buildings are required to have fallout shelters. A deputy recently tried to annul this law, but Parliament stood against it: Yes, there may never be a nuclear war, but what about the threat of chemical weapons? We must protect our citizens. So the costly fallout shelters continue to be built, and are used as wine cellars and storage spaces while we wait for the Apocalypse.

There are some things, however, that despite all our efforts to remain an island of peace, we cannot keep from crossing our borders.

Drugs, for example.

National governments attempt to control the suppliers and close their eyes to the buyers. We may live in paradise, but aren’t we all stressed by traffic, responsibilities, deadlines, and boredom? Drugs stimulate productivity (cocaine) and relieve tension (hashish). So, not wanting to give a bad example to the world, we both prohibit and tolerate them at the same time.

But whenever the problem begins to take on noticeable proportions, some celebrity or public figure gets arrested with narcotics by “coincidence.” The case winds up in the media as an example to discourage young people and show the public that the government has everything under control. Woe to those who refuse to comply with the law!

This happens, at most, once a year. But I don’t believe that it’s only once a year that someone important decides to break with routine and go to the underpass at Mont Blanc Bridge to buy something from the dealers who appear like clockwork every day. If that were the case, the dealers would be long gone for lack of clientele.

I arrive at the underpass. Families come and go while the suspicious characters stay put, not bothering one another or reacting, except when a young couple chatting in a foreign language strolls by, or when an executive in a suit walks through the underpass and turns back around immediately to look directly in their eyes.

The first time I walk through and reach the other side, where I take a sip of mineral water and complain about the cold to a person I’ve never seen before. She doesn’t reply, immersed in her own world. I return and the same men are there. We make eye contact, but for once, there are a lot of people passing by. It’s lunchtime and people should be at the overpriced restaurants that dot the neighborhood, trying to make an important business deal or wine and dine the tourist who came to the city in search of work.

I wait a bit and walk by a third time. I make eye contact again, and one man asks me to follow him with a simple nod. Never in my life did I imagine I would be doing this, but this year has been so unusual that I no longer find my behavior strange.

I feign an air of nonchalance and go after him.

We walk two or three minutes to the Jardin Anglais. We pass tourists taking photos in front of the flower clock, one of the city’s landmarks. We cross by the station of the small train that runs around the lake, as though we were in Disneyland. Finally, we arrive at the jetty and look at the water like we’re a couple gazing at the Jet d’Eau, the gigantic fountain that reaches up to one hundred forty meters high and has long been the symbol of Geneva.

He waits for me to say something, but I worry that my voice will shake in spite of my self-confident pose. I sit quietly and force him to break the silence:

“Ganja, crystal, acid, or blow?”

Okay, I’m lost. I don’t know what to answer, and the man can tell he’s dealing with a novice. I’ve been tested and I didn’t pass.

He laughs. I ask if he thinks I’m with the police.

“Of course not. The police would know immediately what I’m talking about.”

I explain that it’s my first time doing this.

“You can tell. A woman dressed like you would never bother coming down here. You could ask your nephew or a work colleague for leftovers from their personal stash. That’s why I brought you to the edge of the lake. We could have done the deal as we walked, and then I wouldn’t be wasting so much of my time. But I want to know exactly what you’re looking for, and if you need advice.”

He wasn’t wasting his time; he must have been dying of boredom just standing around in that underpass. In the three times I walked past, there hadn’t been a single interested customer.

“All right, I’ll repeat in terms you might understand: hashish, amphetamines, LSD, or cocaine?”

I ask if he has crack or heroin. He says those drugs are banned. I want to tell him that the ones he mentioned are also banned, but I bite my tongue.

It’s not for me, I explain. It’s for an enemy.

“You mean revenge? You want to kill someone with an overdose? Please, lady, find somebody else.”

He begins to walk away, but I stop him and plead for him to listen to me. I note that desperation has likely already doubled the price.

As far as I know, the person in question doesn’t do drugs, I explain. But she has seriously harmed my romantic relationship. I just want to set a trap for her.

“That’s going against the ethics of God.”

Will you look at that? Someone who sells addictive and possibly deadly products is trying to put me on the right path!

I tell him my story. I’ve been married for ten years, I have two wonderful children. My husband and I have the same kind of smartphone, and two months ago I grabbed his by accident.

“You don’t use a security code?”

Of course not. We trust each other. Or maybe his has one, but it was deactivated at that moment. What’s important is I found around four hundred texts and several photos of an attractive blond woman who is well-off, by the looks of it. I did what I shouldn’t have. I made a scene. I asked him who she was, and he didn’t deny it—he said she was the woman he loved. He was glad that I had found out before he had to tell me.

“That happens very often.”

The dealer has gone from pastor to marriage counselor! But I keep going—because I am getting excited about the story I’m telling as I invent it. I asked him to move out. He agreed, and the next day he left me with our two children to go live with the love of his life. But she didn’t take very kindly to this plan, as she thought it much more fun to be in a relationship with a married man than to live with a husband she didn’t choose.

“Women! It’s impossible to understand you!”

I think so, too. I continue my story: She said she wasn’t ready to live with him and broke it off. As I imagine often happens, he came home begging for forgiveness. I forgave him. I actually wanted him to return. I’m a romantic woman, and I wouldn’t know how to live without the person I love.

But now, after only a few weeks, I’ve noticed he’s changed again. He’s no longer foolish enough to leave his phone lying around, so there’s no way to find out if they’re back together. But I suspect they are. And the woman—that blond, independent executive, irresistibly charming and powerful—is taking what’s most important in my life: love. Does he know what love is?

“I understand what you want, but it’s really dangerous.”

How can he understand if I haven’t finished explaining?

“You want to set a trap for this woman, but we don’t have the kind of merchandise you’re asking for. To carry out your plan, you would need at least thirty grams of cocaine.”

He grabs his smartphone, pulls up something, and shows it to me. It’s a page from CNN’s Money site detailing the price of drugs. I’m surprised, but discover it’s a recent report on the difficulties facing the major cartels.

“As you can see, you’ll need to spend five thousand Swiss francs. Is it worth it? Wouldn’t it be cheaper to go over to this woman’s house and make a fuss? Besides, from what I understand, she might not be guilty of anything.”

He had gone from pastor to marriage counselor. And now, from marriage counselor, he’s turned into a financial adviser, trying to keep me from needlessly spending my money.

I say I accept the risk. I know I’m right. But why thirty grams and not ten?

“It’s the minimum amount to frame a person as a drug dealer. The penalty is much heavier than the one for users. Are you sure you want to do this? Because you could be arrested on the way to your house, or to that woman’s house, and you’d have no way of explaining why the drugs are in your possession.”

Are all drug dealers like this, or did I just fall into the hands of someone special? I’d love to spend hours chatting with this man. He’s so experienced and knowledgeable. But apparently, he’s very busy. He asks me to return in half an hour with the money in cash. I go to an ATM, surprised at my own naïveté. Of course drug dealers don’t carry large quantities. Otherwise they’d be considered drug dealers!

I return and he is waiting. I hand over the money discreetly and he points to a trash can.

“Please don’t leave the goods somewhere where the woman can find it, because she might get confused and wind up ingesting it. That would be a disaster.”

This man is one of a kind; he thinks of everything. If he were the CEO of a multinational, he’d be earning a fortune in shareholder bonuses.

I think about continuing the conversation, but he’s already walked away. I look back at the trash can. What if there’s nothing there? But no, these men have a reputation to uphold and wouldn’t do something like that.

Looking around, I walk over and grab the manila envelope inside, putting it in my bag and immediately taking a taxi to the newspaper offices. I’m going to be late again.


I paid a fortune for something that weighs almost nothing.

But how do I know that man didn’t trick me? I need to find out for myself.

I rent two or three movies whose main characters are addicts. My husband is surprised by my new interest.

“You’re not thinking of doing that, are you?”

Of course not! It’s just research for the newspaper. By the way, I’ll be home late tomorrow. I’ve decided to write an article about Lord Byron’s castle and I need to stop by there. You needn’t worry.

“I’m not worried. I think things have improved a lot since we spent that day in Nyon. We need to travel more, maybe at New Year’s Eve. Next time we’ll leave the children with my mother. I’ve been talking with people who understand this kind of thing.”

The “thing” must be what he considers my depression. Who exactly have you been talking to? Some friend who will spill the beans the first time he has a little too much to drink?

“No, not at all. A marriage counselor.”

How awful! Marriage counseling was the last thing I heard that terrible afternoon at the golf club. Have the two of them been talking behind my back?

“Maybe I caused your problem. I don’t give you the attention you deserve. I’m always talking about work, or things we need to do. We’ve lost the romance needed to maintain a happy family. Caring about the children isn’t enough. We need more than that while we’re still young. Who knows, maybe we can revisit Interlaken, the first trip we took together after we met? We can climb part of the Jungfrau and enjoy the scenery from above.”

A marriage counselor! That’s all I need.


The conversation with my husband reminds me of an old saying: there is none so blind as the one who does not want to see.

How could he think he’d forsaken me? Where did he get such a crazy idea? It’s not as if I’m welcoming him to bed with open arms and legs.

It has been a while since we had an intense sexual relationship. In a healthy relationship, this is even more important for a couple’s stability than making plans for the future or talking about the children. Interlaken takes me back to a time when we strolled around the city in the late afternoon—because the rest of the time we were locked up in the hotel, making love and drinking cheap wine.

When we love someone, we’re not satisfied with knowing only the person’s soul—we also want to understand the person’s body. Is it necessary? I don’t know, but instinct encourages us. There is no set time for it to take place, no rules to follow. Nothing beats that moment of revelation when shyness loses ground to boldness, and quiet moans turn into squeals and swearing. Yes, swearing—I have an overwhelming need to hear forbidden and “dirty” things when I’ve got a man inside me.

In these moments, the same old questions arise: “Am I squeezing too hard?” “Should I go faster or slower?” These questions might seem out of place or bothersome, but they are part of this act of initiation, understanding, and mutual respect. It is very important to talk while building a perfect intimacy. The opposite would mean silent and dishonest frustration.

Then comes marriage. We try to maintain the same behaviors, and sometimes we succeed—in my case, it lasted until I got pregnant the first time, which happened quickly. Until suddenly we realize that things have changed.

Sex, from now on, is only at night and preferably just before bedtime. As if it were an obligation, both parties accept without questioning whether the other is in the mood. If sex is skipped, suspicions arise, so it’s best to stick to the ritual.

If it wasn’t good, don’t say anything, because tomorrow may be better. After all, we’re married. We have our whole lives ahead of us.

There is nothing else to discover, and we try to get as much pleasure as possible from the same things. This is like eating chocolate every day, without changing brands or trying new flavors: it’s not a sacrifice, but isn’t there anything else?

Of course there is: little toys you can buy at sex shops, swinger clubs, inviting a third person to join, or taking adventurous chances at parties hosted by unconventional friends.

To me, this is all very risky. We don’t know what the consequences will be—it’s better to leave things alone.

And so the days go by. We discover by talking with friends that the so-called simultaneous orgasm—where a couple becomes aroused at the same time, caressing the same parts and moaning in unison—is a myth. How can I have pleasure if I have to be paying attention to what I’m doing? Touch my body, drive me wild, and then I’ll do the same to you—that would be more natural.

But most of the time that’s not how it is. The communion has to be “perfect,” or, in other words, nonexistent.

And careful with the moaning, so as not to wake the children.

Ah, I’m glad that’s over, I was so tired and don’t know how I managed. You’re the best! Good night.

Until the day when one of the two realizes they need a break from the routine. But instead of going to swinger clubs, or sex shops full of gadgets we can’t even figure out how to work properly, or to the home of wild friends who keep discovering new things, we decide to … spend some time without the children.

Plan a romantic getaway. With no surprises. Where everything will be absolutely, utterly planned and organized.

And we think this a great idea.





I create a fake e-mail account. I have the drugs, duly tested (followed by my vow never to do that again, because it felt great).

I know how to enter the university without being seen and plant the evidence in Marianne’s desk. All I have to do is determine which drawer she won’t be opening anytime soon, which is the riskiest part of my plan. But that’s what the drug dealer suggested, and I should listen to the voice of experience.

I can’t ask a student for help. I’ll have to do it on my own. But other than this, I’ve got nothing else to do but nurture my husband’s “romantic dream” and bombard Jacob’s phone with my messages of love and hope.

The conversation with the drug dealer gave me an idea, which I put into practice: every day I send text messages of love and encouragement. This can work in two ways. The first is that Jacob will realize he has my support and that I’m not the least bit upset about our meeting at the golf club. The second, should the first fail, is if Mme König one day goes to the trouble of rummaging through her husband’s phone.

I go online, copy something that seems intelligent, and press “send.”

Since the election, nothing important has happened in Geneva. Jacob is no longer quoted in the press, and I have no idea what is happening with him. Only one thing has mobilized public opinion lately: whether or not the city should cancel the New Year’s Eve party.

According to some deputies, the expense is “exorbitant.” I was in charge of finding out exactly what that meant. I went to city hall and uncovered the amount: 115,000 Swiss francs, or what two people—me, and the colleague who works beside me, for example—pay in taxes.

In other words, with the tax money from two citizens who earn a reasonable but not extraordinary salary, they could make thousands of people happy. But no. We must save our money, because no one knows what the future has in store. Meanwhile, the city’s coffers fill. We might run out of salt to dump on the streets this winter to keep the snow from turning into ice and causing accidents, or the sidewalks are always in need of repair. Everywhere you look there is roadwork and construction that no one can explain.

Happiness can wait. What’s important is “keeping up appearances,” which really means “don’t let anyone realize that we are extremely wealthy.”


I have to wake up early tomorrow and get to work. The fact that Jacob has ignored my messages has brought me closer to my husband. Yet I still intend to exact some revenge.

True, I have almost no desire to go through with it now, but I hate to abandon my plans halfway. Living is making decisions and dealing with the consequences. I haven’t done that in a long time, and perhaps that’s one of the reasons I’m lying here in the middle of the night and staring at the ceiling again.

Sending messages to a man who rejects me is a waste of time and money. I no longer care about his happiness. Actually, I want him to be really unhappy, because I offered him the best part of me and he suggested I try marriage counseling.

And because of that, I must put that witch in jail, even if my soul lingers in purgatory for centuries.

I must? Where did that come from? I’m tired, so tired, and I can’t sleep.

“Married Women More Likely to Suffer from Depression than Single Women,” claimed an article published in today’s newspaper.

I didn’t read it. But this year is turning out to be very, very strange.


When I was a teenager, everything in my life went exactly as I planned. I was happy … but now something has happened.

It’s like a virus has infected the computer. The destruction has begun, slow but relentless. Everything is slowing down. Some large programs now require a lot of memory to open. Certain files—photos, documents—have disappeared without a trace.

We looked for the reason but found nothing. We asked friends who know more about these things, but they are unable to detect the problem, either. The computer is becoming empty, sluggish, and it is no longer ours. The undetectable virus now owns it. Sure, we can always switch to a new machine, but what about the things stored there, the things that took so many years to put in order? Are they lost forever?

It’s not fair.

I don’t have the slightest control over what is happening. My absurd infatuation with a man who, by now, must think he’s being harassed. My marriage to a man who seems close, but who never shows his weaknesses and vulnerabilities. The desire to destroy someone I met only once, on the pretext that it will do away with my inner ghosts.

A lot of people say time heals all wounds, but that isn’t true.

Apparently, time heals only the good things that we wish to hold on to forever. Time tells us, “Don’t be fooled, this is reality.” That’s why the things I read to lift my spirits don’t stay with me for very long. There is a hole in my soul that drains me of all positive energy, leaving behind only emptiness. I know the hole well—I have lived with it for months—but I don’t know how to escape its hold over me.

Jacob thinks I need marriage counseling. My boss considers me an excellent journalist. My children notice a change in my behavior, but ask nothing. My husband understood what I was feeling only after we went to a restaurant and I tried to open my soul to him.

I take the iPad from the nightstand. I multiply 365 by 70. The answer is 25,550. That’s the average number of days a normal person lives. How many have I already wasted?

People around me always complain about everything. “I work eight hours a day, and if I get promoted, I’ll be working twelve.” “Ever since I got married, I don’t have any time for myself.” “I searched for God and now I have to go to church services, Mass, and religious ceremonies.”

Everything we seek so enthusiastically before we reach adulthood—love, work, faith—turns into a burden too heavy to bear.

There is only one way to escape this: love. To love is to transform slavery into freedom.

But right now, I can’t love. I just feel hate.

And as absurd as this might sound, it gives meaning to my days.





I ARRIVE at the building where Marianne teaches her philosophy classes—an annex that, to my surprise, is located on one of the University Hospital of Geneva’s campuses. Then I begin to wonder: Could this prized course on her CV be nothing more than an extracurricular with absolutely no academic weight?


Having parked the car at a supermarket, I walked about half a mile to get to this jumble of low buildings that sit in a beautiful green field with a little lake in the middle. Arrows indicate directions. Over there are institutions that, seemingly disconnected, are complementary if you stop to think about it: the hospital ward for the elderly and a mental hospital. The latter is in a beautiful building from the early twentieth century where psychiatrists, nurses, psychologists, and psychotherapists from all over Europe graduate.

I walk by something that, strangely, looks like the beacons one finds at the end of an airport runway. I have to read the sign beside it to figure out what it is. It’s a sculpture called Passage 2000, a “visual song” comprising ten bars from railway crossings, all equipped with red lights. I wonder if the person who made it was one of the patients, but I discover when I keep reading that the work is by a famous sculptor. Let’s respect art, but don’t give me this about artists being normal.

It’s my lunch hour—my only free time during the day, and when the most interesting things in my life always seem to happen—like meetings with friends, politicians, sources, and drug dealers.

The classrooms should be empty. I can’t go to the campus restaurant, where Marianne—or Mme König—is probably casually flipping her blond hair to the side while the boys who study there imagine how they could seduce such an interesting woman and the girls gaze at her as a model of elegance, intelligence, and good behavior.

I go to the reception desk and ask for directions to Mme König’s classroom. I am told that it is lunchtime (something there is no way I couldn’t already know). I say that I don’t want to interrupt her during her break, so I will wait for her outside her classroom door.

I am dressed normally, like a person you look at and immediately forget. The only suspicious thing is that I am wearing sunglasses on a cloudy day. I let the receptionist catch a glimpse of the bandages I put under the lenses. She will certainly conclude that I have recently had plastic surgery.

I walk toward the room where Marianne teaches, surprised by my composure. I imagined that I would be afraid, that I would give up halfway, but no. I’m here and I feel quite at ease. If I ever have to write about myself, I will do it for the same reason as Mary Shelley and her Victor Frankenstein: I just wanted to get out of a rut, find a better reason for my boring, unchallenging life. Her result was a monster capable of implicating the innocent and saving the guilty.

Everyone has a dark side. Everyone wants a taste of absolute power. I read stories of torture and war and see that those who inflict suffering are driven by an unknown monster when they are able to exert power, but turn into docile fathers, servants of the homeland, and excellent husbands when they return home.

I remember when I was young a boyfriend asked me to take care of his poodle. I hated that dog. I had to share the attention of the man I loved with it. I wanted all his love.

One day I decided to take revenge on that irrational animal, an animal that in no way contributed to the growth of humanity, but whose helplessness aroused love and affection. I began attacking him in a way that would leave no trace by prodding him with a pin stuck on the end of a broomstick. The dog whined and barked, but I didn’t stop until I got tired.

When my boyfriend arrived, he hugged and kissed me like always. He thanked me for taking care of his poodle. We made love, and life continued as before. Dogs can’t talk.

I think of this as I make my way to Marianne’s office. How could I have ever been capable of that? Because everyone is. I’ve seen men madly in love with their wives lose their heads and beat them, only to beg and sob for forgiveness immediately after.

We are incomprehensible animals.

But why do this to Marianne, when all she did was snub me at a party? Why come up with a plan and take the risk of buying drugs and planting them in her desk?

Because she’s attained what I cannot: Jacob’s love and attention.

Is that a good enough answer? If it were, 99.9 percent of people would be conspiring to destroy one another right now.

Maybe it’s because I am tired of complaining. Because these sleepless nights are driving me mad. Because I feel comfortable in my madness. Because I won’t get caught. Because I want to stop obsessing about this. Because I am seriously ill. Because I am not the only one. Frankenstein has never gone out of print, because everyone sees a bit of themselves in both the scientist and the monster.

I stop. I’m seriously ill. It’s a real possibility. Maybe I should get out of here right now and find a doctor. I need to finish the task I’ve set out to do, but I will, even if the doctor then tells the police—he’ll protect me with patient confidentiality, but at the same time expose an injustice.

I arrive at the classroom door, reflecting on the “whys” I’ve listed along the way. I go in anyway, without hesitation.

I find a cheap desk with no drawers. Just a wooden tabletop on turned legs. Something for laying down a few books, a bag, and nothing more.

I should have guessed. I’m frustrated and relieved at the same time.

The halls, previously silent, begin to show signs of life; people are returning to class. I leave without looking back, walking in the direction from where they came. There is a door at the end of the hall. I open it and exit at the top of a small hill across from the hospital for the elderly with its massive walls and—I’m sure—the heating running smoothly. I walk over and, at the reception desk, I ask for someone who doesn’t exist. I am told the person must be somewhere else—Geneva must have more nursing homes per square meter than any other city. The nurse offers to look around for me. I say there’s no need, but she insists:

“It’s no trouble.”

To avoid further suspicion, I agree to let her search. While she sits busily at her computer, I pick a book off the counter and leaf through it.

“They’re children’s stories,” says the nurse, without taking her eyes off the screen. “The patients love them.”

It makes sense. I open to a page at random:


A mouse was always depressed because he was afraid of cats. A great wizard took pity on him and turned him into a cat. Then he started to be afraid of dogs, and so the wizard turned him into a dog. Then he began to fear tigers. The wizard, who was very patient, used his powers to turn him into a tiger. Then he was afraid of hunters. Finally, the wizard gave up and turned him back into a mouse, saying:

“Nothing I do will help you, because you never understood your growth. You are better being what you always were.”


The nurse is unable to find the imaginary patient. She apologizes. I thank her and prepare to leave, but apparently she is happy to have someone to talk to.

“Do you think plastic surgery helps?”

Plastic surgery? Ah, right. I remember the small pieces of adhesive tape under my sunglasses.

“Most patients here have had plastic surgery. If I were you, I would stay away. It creates an imbalance between the mind and body.” I didn’t ask her opinion, but she seems overcome with humanitarian duty and continues: “The aging process is more traumatic for those who think they can control the passage of time.”

I ask her nationality: Hungarian. Of course. Swiss people never give their opinion without being asked.

I thank her for her trouble and leave, taking off the sunglasses and bandages. The disguise worked, but the plan did not. The campus is empty again. Now everyone is busy learning how to care, how to think, and how to make others think.

I take the long way back to my car. From a distance, I can see the psychiatric hospital. Should I be in there?





ARE WE all like this? I ask my husband after the kids have fallen asleep and we are getting ready for bed.


“Like what?”

Like me, who either feels great or feels awful.

“I think so. We’re always practicing self-control, trying to keep the monster from coming out of his hiding place.”

It’s true.

“We aren’t who we want to be. We are what society demands. We are what our parents choose. We don’t want to disappoint anyone; we have a great need to be loved. So we smother the best in us. Gradually, the light of our dreams turns into the monster of our nightmares. They become things not done, possibilities not lived.”

As I understand it, psychiatry used to call it “manic-depressive psychosis,” but now they call it “bipolar disorder” to be more politically correct. Where did they get that name? Is there something different between the north and south poles? It must be a minority …

“Of course people who express those dualities are a minority. But I bet almost every person has that monster inside of them.”

On one side, I’m a villain who goes to a campus to incriminate an innocent person without understanding the motive behind my hatred. On the other, I’m a mother who takes loving care of her family, working hard so that my loved ones want for nothing, but still without understanding where I get the strength to keep these feelings strong.

“Do you remember Jekyll and Hyde?”

Apparently, Frankenstein isn’t the only book that has stayed in print since it was first published: The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, which Robert Louis Stevenson wrote in three days, follows suit. The story is set in London in the nineteenth century. Physician and researcher Henry Jekyll believes that good and evil coexist in all people. He is determined to prove his theory, which was ridiculed by almost everyone he knows, including the father of his fiancée, Beatrix. After working tirelessly in his laboratory, he manages to develop a formula. Not wanting to endanger anyone’s life, he uses himself as a guinea pig.

As a result, his demonic side—whom he calls Mr. Hyde—is revealed. Jekyll believes he can control Hyde’s comings and goings, but soon realizes that he is sorely mistaken; when we release our dark side, it will completely overshadow the best in us.

The same is true for all individuals. That is how dictators are born. In the beginning they generally have excellent intentions, but little by little, in order to do what they think is for the “good” of their people, they make use of the very worst in human nature: terror.

I’m confused and scared. Can this happen to anyone?

“No. Only a minority lack a clear notion of right or wrong.”

I don’t know if this minority is all that small; something similar happened to me in school. I had a teacher who was the best person in the world, but suddenly he changed and left me completely bewildered. All the students lived in fear, because it was impossible to predict how he would be from day to day. But no one dared complain. Teachers are always right, after all. Besides, everyone thought he had some problem at home, and that it would soon be resolved. Until one day, this Mr. Hyde lost control and attacked one of my classmates. The case went to the school board and he was removed.

Since that time, I’ve become afraid of people who seem excessively sensitive.

“Like the tricoteuses.”

Yes, like those hardworking women who wanted justice and bread for the poor, and who fought to free France from the excesses committed by Louis XVI. When the reign of terror began, they would go down to the guillotine square bright and early, guarding their front-row seats and knitting as they waited on those who had been condemned to die. Possible mothers, who spent the rest of their day looking after their children and husbands.

Knitting to pass the time between one severed head and the next.

“You’re stronger than me. I always envied that. Maybe that’s the reason I’ve never shown my feelings—so I won’t seem weak.”

He doesn’t know what he’s saying. But the conversation has already ended. He rolls over and goes to sleep.

And I’m left alone with my “strength,” staring at the ceiling.





ONE week later, I do what I promised myself I would never do: see a psychiatrist.


I make three appointments with different doctors. Their schedules are packed—a sign there are more unbalanced people in Geneva than imagined. I say it’s urgent, but the secretaries contend that everything is urgent, thank me for my interest and apologize, but they can’t cancel other patients’ appointments.

I resort to the trump card that never fails: I say where I work. The magic word “journalist,” followed by the name of a major newspaper, can open as many doors as it closes. In this case, I already knew the outcome would be favorable. The appointments are made.

I don’t tell anyone—not my husband, not my boss. I visit the first one—a strange sort of man with a British accent, who is adamant that he does not accept national health insurance. I suspect he is working in Switzerland illegally.

I explain, with all the patience in the world, what is happening to me. I use the examples of Frankenstein and his monster, of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. I beg him to help me control the monster that is rising up and threatening to escape my control. He asks me what that meant. I don’t want to provide details that might put me in a compromising situation, such as my attempt to have a certain woman wrongfully arrested for drug trafficking.

I decide to tell a lie: I explain that I am having murderous thoughts, thinking about killing my husband in his sleep. He asks if one of us has a lover, and I say no. He understands completely and thinks it is normal. One year of treatment, three sessions per week, will reduce this drive by fifty percent. I am shocked! And what if I kill my husband before then? He replies that what is happening is a “transference,” a “fantasy,” and that real murderers never seek help.

Before I leave, he charges me 250 Swiss francs and asks the secretary to make regular appointments for me starting the following week. I thank him, say I need to check my schedule, and shut the door, never to return.

The second appointment is with a woman. She takes insurance and is more open to hearing what I have to say. I repeat the same story about wanting to kill my husband.

“Well, sometimes I also think about killing mine,” she tells me with a smile. “But we both know that if every woman went through with her secret wishes, nearly all children would be fatherless. This is a normal impulse.”

Normal?

After a long conversation, during which she explains that I am being “bullied” in my marriage, that without a doubt “I have no room to grow,” and that my sexuality “is causing hormonal disturbances widely addressed in medical literature,” she takes her prescription pad and writes down the name of a known antidepressant. She adds that until the medication takes effect, I will still be facing one month of hell, but soon all of this will be nothing more than an unpleasant memory.

As long as I continued taking the pills, of course. For how long?

“It really varies. But I believe that in three years you’ll be able to reduce the dosage.”

The big problem with using insurance is that the bill is sent to the patient’s home. I pay in cash, close the door, and swear never to return to that place, either.

Finally, I go to the third appointment, another man in an office that must have cost a fortune to decorate. Unlike the first two, he listens to me attentively and seems to agree with me. I do indeed run the risk of killing my husband. I am a potential killer. I am losing control of a monster that I can’t put back into its cage.

Finally, with great care, he asks if I use drugs.

Just once, I reply.

He doesn’t believe me. He changes the subject. We talk a bit about the conflicts we’re all forced to deal with on a daily basis, and then he returns to the drugs.

“You need to trust me. No one uses drugs just once. We’re protected by doctor-patient confidentiality. I’ll lose my medical license if I mention anything about this. It’s better if we speak openly, before making your next appointment. Not only do you have to accept me as your doctor, but I also have to accept you as my patient. That’s the way it works.”

No, I insist. I don’t use drugs. I know the laws and I didn’t come here to lie. I just want to resolve this problem quickly, before I do any harm to people I love or who are close to me.

His pensive face is bearded and handsome. He nods before replying:

“You’ve spent years accumulating these tensions and now you want to get rid of them overnight. That does not exist in psychiatry or psychoanalysis. We’re not shamans who magically drive out evil spirits.”

Of course, he is being ironic, but he has just given me an excellent idea. My days of seeking psychiatric help are over.





POST Tenebras Lux. After darkness, light.


I am standing in front of the old city wall, a monument one hundred meters wide with towering statues of four men who are flanked by two smaller statues. One stands out from the rest. His head is covered, he has a long beard, and he holds in his hands what, in his time, was more powerful than a machine gun: the Bible.

While I wait, I think: If that man in the middle had been born today, everyone—especially Catholics, in France and around the world—would call him a terrorist. His tactics for implementing what he believed to be the ultimate truth remind me of the perverted mind of Osama bin Laden. Both men had the same goal: to install a theocratic state in which all who disobeyed what was understood to be the law of God should be punished.

And neither of the two hesitated to use terror to achieve their goals.

His name is John Calvin, and Geneva was his field of operations. Hundreds of people were sentenced to death and executed not far from here. Not only Catholics who dared to keep their faith, but also scientists who, in search of truth and the cures for diseases, challenged the literal interpretation of the Bible. The most famous case was that of Michael Servetus, who discovered pulmonary blood circulation and died at the stake because of it.


Whoever maintains that wrong is done to heretics and blasphemers in punishing them makes himself an accomplice in their crime and as guilty as they. There is no question here of man’s authority; it is God who speaks […]. Wherefore does he demand of us a so extreme severity, if not to show us that due honor is not paid him, so long as we set not his service above every human consideration, so that we spare not kin, nor blood of any, and forget all humanity when the matter is to combat for His glory.


The death and destruction were not limited to Geneva; Calvin’s apostles, likely represented by the monument’s smaller statues, spread his word and his intolerance throughout Europe. In 1566 several churches in the Netherlands were destroyed and “rebels”—in other words, people of a different faith—were murdered. An enormous amount of artwork was thrown in the fire on the pretext of “idolatry.” Part of the world’s historical and cultural heritage was destroyed and lost forever.

And today my children study Calvin at school as if he were a great Illuminist, a man with new ideas who “freed” us from the yoke of Catholicism. A revolutionary who deserves to be revered by future generations.

After the darkness, light.

What went on in that man’s head? I wonder. Did he lie awake at night knowing that families were being wiped out, that children were being separated from their parents, or that blood flooded the pavement? Or was he so convinced of his mission that there was no room for doubt?

Did he think everything he did could be justified in the name of love? Because that is what I doubt, and the crux of my current problems.

Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. People who knew him said that, in private, Calvin was a good man, capable of following the words of Jesus and making amazing gestures of humility. He was feared, but also loved—and could ignite crowds with that love.

As history is written by the victors, no one today remembers his atrocities. Now he is seen as the physician of souls, the great reformer, the one who saved us from Catholic heresy, with its angels, saints, virgins, gold, silver, indulgences, and corruption.


The man I’m waiting for arrives, interrupting my thoughts. He is a Cuban shaman. I explain that I convinced my editor to do a story on alternative ways of combating stress. The business world is full of people who behave with extreme generosity one moment and then take out their anger on those weaker. People are increasingly unpredictable.

Psychiatrists and psychoanalysts are booked solid and can no longer see every patient. And no one can wait months or years to treat depression.

The Cuban man listens to me without saying a word. I ask if we can continue our conversation in a café, since we’re standing outside and the temperature has dropped significantly.

“It’s the cloud,” he says, accepting my invitation.

The famous cloud hangs in the city skies until February or March and is driven away only occasionally by the mistral, which clears the sky but makes the temperature drop even more.

“How did you find me?”

A security guard from the newspaper told me about you. The editor-in-chief wanted me to interview psychologists, psychiatrists, and psychotherapists, but that’s been done a hundred times.

I need something original, and he might be just the right person.

“You can’t publish my name. What I do isn’t covered by national insurance.”

I suppose that what he is really trying to say is: “What I do is illegal.”


I talk for nearly twenty minutes, trying to put him at ease, but the Cuban man spends the whole time studying me. He has tanned skin and gray hair, and he’s short and wears a suit and tie. I never imagined a shaman dressed like that.

I explain that everything he tells me will be kept secret. We’re just interested in knowing if many people seek his services. From what I hear, he has healing powers.

“That’s not true. I can’t heal people. Only God can do that.”

Okay, we agree. But every day we meet someone whose behavior suddenly changes from one moment to the next. And we wonder: What happened to this person I thought I knew? Why is he acting so aggressively? Is it stress at work?

And then the next day the person is normal again. You’re relieved, but soon after the rug is pulled out from under you when you least expect it. And this time, instead of asking what’s wrong with this person, you wonder what you did wrong.

The shaman says nothing. He still doesn’t trust me.

Is it curable?

“There’s a cure, but it belongs to God.”

Yes, I know, but how does God cure it?

“It varies. Look into my eyes.”

I obey and fall into some sort of trance, unable to control where I’m going.

“In the name of the forces that guide my work, by the power given to me, I ask the spirits who protect me to destroy your life and that of your family if you decide to turn me over to the police or report me to the immigration authorities.”

He waves his hand a few times around my head. It feels like the most surreal thing in the world, and I want to get up and leave. But when I come to, he’s already back to normal—neither friendly nor aloof.

“You may ask. I trust you now.”

I’m a little frightened. But it really isn’t my intention to harm this man. I order another cup of tea and explain exactly what I want. The doctors I “interviewed” say that healing takes a long time. The security guard suggested that—I weigh my words carefully—God was able to use the shaman as a channel to end a serious depression problem.

“We are the ones who create the messes in our heads. It does not come from outside. All you have to do is ask the aid of the guardian spirit who enters your soul and helps tidy the house. But no one believes in guardian spirits anymore. They are there watching us, dying to help, but no one calls on them. My job is to bring them closer to those in need and wait for them to do their work. That’s all.”

Let’s say, hypothetically, that during one of these moments of aggression, a person devises a Machiavellian plan to destroy another person. Like slandering someone at work, for example.

“It happens every day.”

I know, but when this aggression passes, when the person returns to normal, won’t they be consumed by guilt?

“Sure. And over the years, this merely worsens their condition.”

So Calvin’s motto—after the darkness, light—is wrong.

“What?”

Nothing. I was rambling on about the monument in the park.

“Yes, there is light at the end of the tunnel, if that’s what you mean. But sometimes, when the person crosses through the darkness and reaches the other side, he leaves an enormous path of destruction behind him.”

Perfect, back to the subject of your method.

“It’s not my method. It has been used for many years against stress, depression, irritability, suicide attempts, and the numerous other ways mankind has found to harm himself.” My God, I’ve found the right person. I need to keep my cool.

We could call it a …

“… self-induced trance. Self-hypnosis. Meditation. Every culture has a name for it. But remember that the Medical Society of Switzerland doesn’t look kindly upon these things.”

I explain that I do yoga and that I still can’t manage to reach the state where problems are sorted out and solved.

“Are we talking about you or a story for the newspaper?”

Both. I let down my guard because I know I have no secrets with this man. I was sure of it the moment he asked me to look into his eyes. I explain that his concern with anonymity is absolutely ridiculous—a lot of people know that he sees people at his house in Veyrier. And many people, including prison security guards, use his services. That’s what the guy at the paper explained to me.

“Your problem is with the night,” he says.

Yes, that’s my problem. Why?

“At night, simply because it is night, we are able to revive our childhood terrors: the fear of being alone, the fear of the unknown. But if we can defeat these ghosts, we will easily defeat the ones that appear during the day. We will not fear the darkness because we are partners of the light.”

I feel like I’m sitting with a schoolteacher who is explaining the obvious. Could I go to your house to do a …

“… an exorcism?”

That hadn’t occurred to me, but it is exactly what I need.

“There is no need. I see a lot of darkness in you, but also a lot of light. And in this case, I’m sure that in the end the light will overcome.”

I’m on the verge of tears. The man is actually delving into my soul, and I can’t explain exactly how.

“Let yourself get carried away by the night from time to time. Look up at the stars and try to get drunk on the sense of infinity. The night, with all its charms, is also a path to enlightenment. Just as a dark well has thirst-quenching water at its bottom, the night, whose mystery brings us closer to the mystery of God, has a flame capable of enkindling our soul hidden in its shadows.”

We talk for almost two hours. He insists I need nothing more than to let myself be carried away—and that even my greatest fears are unfounded. I explain my desire for revenge. He listens without commenting or judging a single word. The longer we speak, the better I begin to feel.

He suggests we leave and walk through the park. At one of its gates are huge plastic chess pieces and several black and white squares painted on the ground. Some people are playing, despite the cold weather.

He hardly says anything more; I keep on talking nonstop, sometimes thankful and sometimes cursing the life I lead. We stop in front of one of the giant chessboards. He seems more attentive to the game than to my words. I stop whining and also start following the game, though it doesn’t interest me one bit.

“Go all the way,” he says.

Go all the way? Cheat on my husband, put the cocaine in my rival’s purse, and call the police?

He laughs.

“Do you see these players? They always have to make the next move. They can’t stop in the middle, because that means accepting defeat. There comes a time when defeat is inevitable, but at least they fought until the end. We already have everything we need. There is nothing to improve. Thinking we are good or bad, fair or unfair, all that is nonsense. We know that today Geneva is covered by a cloud that might take months to go away, but sooner or later, it will leave. So go ahead and let yourself go.”

Not one word to stop me from doing something I shouldn’t?

“No. By doing what you shouldn’t, you will realize it yourself. As I said in the restaurant, the light in your soul is greater than the darkness. But for this you must go all the way to the end of the game.”

In my whole life, I don’t think that I’ve ever heard such a preposterous piece of advice. I thank him for his time, ask if I owe him anything. He says no.


Back at the newspaper, the editor asks what took me so long. I explain that because it’s a rather unorthodox topic, it took me a long time to get what I needed.

“And since it’s not all that orthodox, might we be encouraging any unlawful activity?”

Are we encouraging unlawful activity when we bombard young people with incentives for excessive consumption? Are we encouraging accidents when we advertise that new cars can reach speeds of up to 250 kilometers per hour? Are we encouraging depression and suicidal tendencies when we publish articles on successful people without explaining how they got there and make everyone else convince themselves they’re worthless?

The editor-in-chief doesn’t want to discuss this. It could be interesting for the newspaper, whose headline piece of the day was “Chain of Happiness Raises 8 Million Francs for Asian Country.” I write a six-hundred-word article—the most space they would give me—and it’s all taken from Internet searches. I wasn’t able to use anything from my conversation with the shaman that had turned into a treatment session.





JACOB! He’s just risen from the dead and sends me a message inviting me for coffee—as if there weren’t so many other interesting things to do in life. Where is the sophisticated wine taster? Where is the man who now holds power, the greatest aphrodisiac in the world?


But most of all, where is the teenage boyfriend I met back when anything was possible?

He married, changed, and sends a message inviting me for coffee. Couldn’t he be more creative and suggest a nudist run in Chamonix? Maybe then I’d be more interested.

I have no intention of answering. I was given the cold shoulder and humiliated by his silence for weeks on end. Does he think I’ll come running just because he gave me the honor of an invitation?

After I go to bed, I listen with headphones to one of the tapes I recorded of the Cuban shaman. When I was still pretending that I was just a journalist—and not a woman frightened by herself—I had asked if self-hypnosis (or his preferred term, “meditation”) could make someone forget about another person. I broached the subject in a way that would allow him to understand “love” as “trauma by verbal attack,” which was exactly what we were talking about at that moment.

“That is a somewhat murky area,” he replied. “Yes, we can induce relative amnesia, but since this person is associated with other facts and events, it would be practically impossible to eliminate someone completely. What’s more, forgetting is the wrong approach. You should face things head-on.”

I listen to the whole tape, and then try to distract myself, making pledges and jotting down a few more things in my calendar, but nothing works. Before I go to sleep, I send a message to Jacob accepting his invitation.

I can’t control myself, that’s my problem.





I WON’T tell you I missed you because you won’t believe me. I won’t tell you I didn’t reply to your messages because I’m afraid of falling in love again.”


I really don’t believe any of that. But I let him continue to try to explain the unexplainable. Here we are in a regular café, nothing special, in Collonges-sous-Salève, a village on our border with France that’s located fifteen minutes from my work. The small handful of other patrons are truck drivers and workers from a nearby quarry.

I’m the only woman, except for the one working the bar, who walks from one end of it to the other, overly made-up and engaging the customers in witty banter.

“It’s been a living hell since you showed up in my life. Ever since that day in my office when you came to interview me and we exchanged intimacies.”

“Exchanged intimacies” is a figure of speech. I gave him oral sex. He did nothing to me.

“I can’t say I’m unhappy, but I’m increasingly lonely, though no one knows. Even when I’m among friends, and the atmosphere and drinks are great, the conversation is lively and I’m smiling, all of a sudden, for no reason, I can’t pay attention to the conversation. I say I have an important commitment and I leave. I know what I’m missing: you.”

It’s time to get my revenge: You don’t think you might need some marriage counseling?

“I do. But I would have to go with Marianne, and I can’t convince her. For her, philosophy explains everything. She’s noticed I’m different, but attributes it to the elections.”

The shaman was right when he said we must take things all the way. At this moment, Jacob has just saved his wife from a serious drug-trafficking charge.

“I’ve taken on too many responsibilities and I’m not yet accustomed to it. According to her, I’ll be used to everything soon. What about you?”

What about me? What exactly do you want to know?

All my efforts to resist fell apart the moment I saw him sitting alone at a table in the corner with a Campari and soda in front of him, and he smiled as soon as he saw me enter. We’re like teenagers again, only this time we can drink alcohol without breaking any laws. I hold his icy hands—icy from cold or fear, I don’t know.

I’m fine, I say. I suggest that next time we meet earlier—daylight savings time is over and it’s getting dark fast.

He agrees and gives me a discreet kiss on the lips, anxious not to draw attention from the men around us.

“For me, one of the worst things are the beautiful sunny days this autumn. I open the curtains in my office and see people out there, some walking and holding hands without having to worry about the consequences. And I can’t show my love.”

Love? Did that Cuban shaman feel sorry for me and ask for some help from mysterious spirits?

I expected almost anything from this meeting, except a man opening his soul to me like he is doing now. My heart beats stronger and stronger—from joy, surprise. I won’t ask why this is happening.

“See, it’s not that I’m jealous of others. I just don’t understand why they can be happy and I can’t.”

He pays the bill in euros, we cross the border on foot and walk toward our cars, which are parked on the other side of the street—i.e., Switzerland.

There is no more time for displays of affection. We say good-bye with three kisses on the cheek and each one heads toward his or her destiny.

Just like what happened at the golf club, I am unable to drive when I reach my car. I put on a cowl scarf to protect me from the cold and start to walk aimlessly around the hamlet. I pass a post office and a hairdresser. I see an open bar, but would rather walk to unwind. I have no interest in understanding what is happening. I just want it to happen.

“I open the curtains in my office and see people out there, some walking and holding hands without having to worry about the consequences. And I can’t show my love,” he’d said.

And when I felt like no one, absolutely no one, was capable of understanding what was going on inside me—not a shaman, not a psychoanalyst, not even my husband—you materialized to explain it to me …

It’s loneliness. Even though I’m surrounded by loved ones who care about me and want only the best, it’s possible they try to help only because they feel the same thing—loneliness—and why, in a gesture of solidarity, you’ll find the phrase “I am useful, even if alone” carved in stone.

Though the brain says all is well, the soul is lost, confused, doesn’t know why life is being unfair to it. But we still wake up in the morning and take care of our children, our husband, our lover, our boss, our employees, our students, those dozens of people who make an ordinary day come to life.

And we often have a smile on our face and a word of encouragement, because no one can explain their loneliness to others, especially when we are always in good company. But this loneliness exists and eats away at the best parts of us because we must use all our energy to appear happy, even though we will never be able to deceive ourselves. But we insist, every morning, on showing only the rose that blooms, and keep the thorny stem that hurts us and makes us bleed hidden within.

Even knowing that everyone, at some point, has felt completely and utterly alone, it is humiliating to say, “I’m lonely, I need company. I need to kill this monster that everyone thinks is as imaginary as a fairy-tale dragon, but isn’t.” But it isn’t. I wait for a pure and virtuous knight, in all his glory, to come defeat it and push it into the abyss for good, but that knight never comes.

Yet we cannot lose hope. We start doing things we don’t usually do, daring to go beyond what is fair and necessary. The thorns inside us will grow larger and more overwhelming, yet we cannot give up halfway. Everyone is looking to see the final outcome, as though life were a huge game of chess. We pretend it doesn’t matter whether we win or lose, the important thing is to compete. We root for our true feelings to stay opaque and hidden, but then …

… instead of looking for companionship, we isolate ourselves even more in order to lick our wounds in silence. Or we go out for dinner or lunch with people who have nothing to do with our lives and spend the whole time talking about things that are of no importance. We even manage to distract ourselves for a while with drink and celebration, but the dragon lives on until the people who are close to us see that something is wrong and begin to blame themselves for not making us happy. They ask what the problem is. We say that everything is fine, but it’s not …

Everything is awful. Please, leave me alone, because I have no more tears to cry or heart left to suffer. All I have is insomnia, emptiness, and apathy, and, if you just ask yourselves, you’re feeling the same thing. But they insist that this is just a rough patch or depression because they are afraid to use the real and damning word: loneliness.

Meanwhile, we continue to relentlessly pursue the only thing that would make us happy: the knight in shining armor who will slay the dragon, pick the rose, and clip the thorns. Many claim that life is unfair. Others are happy because they believe that this is exactly what we deserve: loneliness, unhappiness. Because we have everything and they don’t.

But one day those who are blind begin to see. Those who are sad are comforted. Those who suffer are saved. The knight arrives to rescue us, and life is vindicated once again.

Still, you have to lie and cheat, because this time the circumstances are different. Who hasn’t felt the urge to drop everything and go in search of their dream? A dream is always risky, for there is a price to pay. That price is death by stoning in some countries, and in others it could be social ostracism or indifference. But there is always a price to pay. You keep lying and people pretend they still believe, but secretly they are jealous, make comments behind your back, say you’re the very worst, most threatening thing there is. You are not an adulterous man, tolerated and often even admired, but an adulterous woman, one who is sleeping with someone else and deceiving her husband, her poor husband, always so understanding and loving …

But only you know that this husband is unable to keep the loneliness at bay. Because something has been missing that even you don’t know how to pinpoint, because you love him and don’t want to lose him. But a shining knight promising adventure in distant lands is a much stronger lure than your desire for everything to remain as it is, even if at parties people stare at you and whisper among themselves that it would be better to tie a millstone around your neck and toss you overboard than let you be a terrible example.

And to make matters worse, your husband quietly puts up with everything. He doesn’t complain or make a scene. He believes it will pass. You also know it will pass, but now it’s stronger than you.

That’s the way things go for a month, two months, a year … and everyone quietly puts up with it.

But it’s not about asking permission. You look back and see that you also used to think like these people who have become your accusers. You also used to condemn those you knew were adulterers and imagined that if you lived somewhere else, the punishment would be stoning. Until the day it happens to you. Then you come up with a million excuses for your behavior and say you have the right to be happy, even for a little while, because dragon-slaying knights exist only in fairy tales. The real dragons never die, but you still have the right, just once in your life, to live out an adult fairy tale.

Then comes the moment you tried to avoid at all costs, one that you had been putting off for so long: the moment you must decide to stay together or to separate forever.

Along with this moment, however, comes the fear of making a mistake, no matter what decision you choose. And you hope someone will make the choice for you, throw you out of the house or bed, because it is impossible to go on like this. After all, we are no longer one person, we have become two or many, each completely different. And since you’ve never been through this before, you don’t know where it will end. The fact is that now you are facing a situation that will make one person suffer, or two, or many.

But mostly it will destroy you, whatever your choice.





TRAFFIC is at a standstill. Today of all days!


Geneva, with fewer than two hundred thousand inhabitants, behaves as if it were the center of the world. And there are people who believe this and fly all the way from their own countries to host what they call “summits.” These meetings usually take place on the outskirts of town, and traffic is rarely affected. At most, we catch sight of a few helicopters flying over the city.

I don’t know what happened today, but they closed one of our main roads. I read today’s papers, but not the city sections with the local news. I know that major world powers send their representatives here to discuss the threat of nuclear-weapons proliferation, “on neutral ground.” And does this affect my life?

A lot. I can’t afford to be late. I should have used public transportation instead of taking this stupid car.


Every year, Europe spends approximately 74 million Swiss francs (more than 80 million U.S. dollars) on hiring private detectives who specialize in following, photographing, and providing evidence that a client’s spouse is cheating on them. While the rest of the continent is in crisis and companies are going bankrupt and laying off workers, the infidelity market has seen tremendous growth.

And it’s not only the detectives who profit. Developers have created smartphone apps like SOS Alibi. The way it works is simple: at a set time it sends your partner a sweet message as though you were still at your office. So while you’re between the sheets drinking glasses of champagne, a text pops up on the partner’s phone letting them know you’ll be late leaving work because of an unexpected meeting. Another app, Excuse Machine, offers a series of excuses in French, German, and Italian—and you can choose whichever is most convenient that day.

But besides detectives and programmers, hotels have really come out the winner. With the one in seven Swiss adults who are having an extramarital affair, according to official statistics, and considering the number of married people in the country, we’re talking about four hundred fifty thousand individuals looking for a discreet room where they can meet. To attract customers, the manager of one luxury hotel once said, “We have a system that enables credit-card charges to appear as lunch in our restaurant.” The establishment has become a favorite among those willing to cough up 600 Swiss francs for one afternoon. That is precisely where I’m headed.

After a stressful half an hour, I leave my car with the valet and run up to the room. Thanks to their e-mail service, I know exactly where to go without asking anything at the front desk.

From the café on the French border to where I am now, nothing more was needed—no explanations, no vows of love, not even another meeting—for us to be sure that this was what we really wanted. We were both afraid to think too much and back down, so the decision was made without questions or answers.





IT IS no longer autumn, it is spring. I am sixteen again, and he’s fifteen. I’ve mysteriously regained my soul’s virginity (since my body’s is lost forever). We kiss. My God, I’d forgotten what this is like, I think. I’ve just been living in search of what I wanted—what and how to do it, when to stop—and accepting the same from my husband. It was all wrong. We were no longer completely surrendering to each other.


Maybe he’ll stop now. We hardly ever went beyond kissing before. They were long and delicious, exchanged in a hidden corner of the school, although I wanted everyone to see and envy me.

He doesn’t stop. His tongue tastes bitter, like a mixture of cigarettes and vodka. I’m embarrassed and tense; I need to smoke a cigarette and have a vodka for us to be on equal footing, I think. I push him away gently, go to the minibar, and down a small bottle of gin in one gulp. The alcohol burns my throat. I ask for a cigarette.

He gives me one, but not before reminding me it’s a nonsmoking room. It feels so lovely to break the rules, even stupid ones like that! I take a drag and feel ill. I don’t know if it’s the gin or the smoking, but I go to the bathroom and toss the cigarette into the toilet, to be safe. He comes after me, grabs me from behind, and kisses the nape of my neck and my ears. His body is pressed against mine, and I feel his erection on my back.

Where are my morals? What will happen after I leave here and resume my normal life?

He pulls me back into the room. I turn around and kiss his mouth and tongue that taste like tobacco, saliva, and vodka. I bite his lips and he touches my breasts for the first time since high school. I take off my dress and throw it in the corner. For a split second, I feel a little ashamed of my body—I’m no longer the girl from that spring at school. We remain standing. The curtains are open and Lake Léman is the only barrier between us and the people in the buildings on the far shore.

I imagine someone sees us, and this arouses me even more than him kissing my breasts. I’m a slut, a whore hired by an executive to screw at a hotel, up for absolutely anything.

But this feeling doesn’t last long. Once again I am sixteen, when I masturbated several times a day to the thought of him. I pull his head to my chest and ask him to bite my nipple, hard, and I cry out a little from pain and pleasure.

He is still dressed, and I am completely naked. I push his head and ask him to go down on me. Instead, he throws me on the bed, takes off his clothes, and gets on top. His hands search for something on the nightstand. This makes us lose our balance and we fall to the ground. A sure sign of a beginner—but we are beginners and we aren’t ashamed of it.

He finds what he was looking for: a condom. He asks me to put it on with my mouth. I do, inexperienced and rather awkward. I don’t understand the need for it. I can’t believe that he thinks that I go around sleeping with everyone and might have something. But I respect his wish. I can still taste the unpleasant flavor of the lubricant covering the latex, but I’m determined to learn how to do it. I don’t let it come across that it’s the first time I’ve ever used one of those things.

When I finish, he flips me over and asks me to get on all fours. My God, it’s happening! And I’m happy.

But he starts to take me in the behind instead of my vagina. It frightens me. I ask what he’s doing, but he doesn’t answer, just takes something else from the nightstand and puts it on my anus. I believe it’s Vaseline, or something similar. Then he asks me to masturbate and, very slowly, he enters me.

I follow his instructions, again feeling like a teenager for whom sex is taboo. It hurts. Oh my God, it hurts a lot. I’m unable to masturbate—I just grab on to the sheets and bite my lips to keep from screaming in pain.

“Tell me it hurts. Say you’ve never done this. Scream,” he orders.

Once again I obey him. It’s almost the truth—I’ve done it four or five times and never liked it.

His movements increase with intensity. He moans with pleasure. Me, with pain. He grabs me by the hair like an animal, a mare, and his pace grows faster. He withdraws in a single motion, rips off the condom, turns me over, and comes on my face.

He tries to contain the moans, but they are stronger than his self-control. He slowly lowers himself on top of me. I’m frightened and also fascinated by it all. He goes to the bathroom, throws the condom in the trash, and returns.

Lying down beside me, he lights another cigarette and uses the vodka glass as an ashtray, resting it on my belly. We spend a long time staring at the ceiling, saying nothing. He caresses me. He is no longer the violent man from a few moments ago, but the young romantic who used to talk to me about galaxies and astrology in school.

“We can’t leave any smell.”

His words are a brutal return to reality. Apparently, it’s not his first time. That explains the condom and the particulars that make sure everything stays as it was before we entered the room. I silently insult him and hate him, but I disguise it with a smile and ask if he has any tips for eliminating odors.

He says to take a shower when I get home before hugging my husband. He also suggests that I throw away these panties, because the Vaseline will leave a mark.

“If he’s home, run in and say you’re dying to go to the bathroom.”

I feel disgusted. I waited so long to act like a tigress and ended up being used like a mare. But that’s life; reality never comes close to our teenage romantic fantasies.

Perfect, I’ll do that.

“I’d like to see you again.”

Right. All it took was this simple phrase to transform what seemed like hell, a mistake, a misstep, back into heaven. Yes, I would also like to see you again. I was nervous and shy, but next time will be better.

“Actually, it was great.”

Yes, it was great. I just now realize that. We know this story is doomed to end, but it doesn’t matter now.

I don’t say anything more. I just enjoy this moment by his side and wait for him to finish his cigarette before getting dressed and going downstairs ahead of him.

I’ll leave by the same door through which I entered.

I’ll take the same car and I’ll drive to the same place I return to every night. I’ll run in, saying I have indigestion and need to go to the bathroom. I’ll take a bath, removing what little of him remains on me.

And only then will I kiss my husband and my children.





WE DID not have the same intentions in that hotel room.


I was after a lost romance; he was driven by a hunter’s instinct.

I was looking for the boy from my adolescence; he wanted the attractive and bold woman who had gone to interview him before the elections.

I believed my life could take another direction; he just thought that afternoon would mean something other than the boring and endless discussions at the Council of States.

For him it was just a simple, but dangerous, distraction. For me it was something unforgivable and cruel, a display of narcissism mixed with selfishness.

Men cheat because it’s in their genetic code. A woman does it because she doesn’t have enough dignity; in addition to handing over her body, she always ends up handing over a bit of her heart. A true crime. A theft. It’s worse than robbing a bank, because if one day she is discovered (and she always is), she will cause irreparable damage to her family.

For men it is just a “stupid mistake.” For women, it feels like a spiritual crime against all those who surround her with affection and support her as a mother and wife.

As I’m lying next to my husband, I imagine Jacob lying next to Marianne. He has other worries on his mind: political meetings tomorrow, tasks to complete, his busy schedule. While I, the idiot, am staring at the ceiling and remembering each second I spent in that hotel, watching the same porn movie over and over, in which I had the leading role.

I remember the moment I looked out the window and wished someone were watching us with binoculars—perhaps even masturbating while watching me be submissive, humiliated, taken from behind. Just the idea turned me on! It drove me crazy and led me to discover a side of myself of which I was altogether unaware.

I’m in my thirties. I’m not a child, and I thought there was nothing new about me left to discover. But there is. I am a mystery to myself; I opened the floodgates and I want to go further, try everything that I know exists—masochism, group sex, fetishes, everything.

I’m unable to say that I don’t want any more, that I don’t love him, or that it was just a fantasy created by my loneliness.

Maybe I don’t actually love him. But I love what he has awakened inside me. He treated me with zero respect, left me stripped of my dignity. Undeterred, he did exactly what he wanted, while I strived, once again, to try to please someone.

My mind travels to a secret and unfamiliar place. This time I’m the dominatrix. He’s naked, but now I’m the one giving orders. I tie up his hands and feet, and I sit on his face and force him to kiss my vagina until I can’t take any more orgasms. Then I turn him over and penetrate him with my fingers: first one, then two, three. He moans with pain and pleasure while I masturbate him with my free hand, feeling the hot liquid run down my fingers. I bring them up to my mouth and lick, one at a time, before wiping them on his face. He begs for more. I say that’s enough. I’m the one in charge!

Before I go to sleep, I masturbate and have two orgasms, one after the other.





IT’S THE same scene today as it is every morning: my husband reads the daily news on his iPad; the children sit ready for school; the sun streams through the window; and I pretend to be worried when I’m actually scared to death one of them suspects something.


“You seem happier today.”

I seem happier, and I am, but I shouldn’t be. My experience yesterday was a risk for everyone, especially for me. Is there some underlying suspicion in his comment? I doubt it. He believes everything I tell him. Not because he’s a fool—far from it—but because he trusts me.

And that just makes me more upset. I’m not trustworthy.

Actually, yes, I am. I was led to that hotel on false pretenses. Is that a good excuse? No. It’s awful, because no one forced me to go there. I can always claim that I was feeling lonely and wasn’t getting the attention I needed, just understanding and tolerance. I can tell myself that I need to be defied, confronted, and questioned about what I do. I can claim that this happens to everyone, even if only in their dreams.

But deep down, what happened is very simple: I went to bed with a man because I was dying to do it. Nothing more. No intellectual or psychological justification. I wanted to screw. End of story.

I know people who married for security, status, and money. Love was the last thing on the list. But I married for love.

So why did I do what I did?

Because I feel lonely. Why?

“It’s so nice to see you happy,” he says.

I say that yes, I really am happy. The autumn morning is beautiful, the house is tidy, and I’m with the man I love.

He gets up and gives me a kiss. The children, even without quite understanding our conversation, smile.

“And I’m with the woman I love. But why are you telling me this now?”

Why not now?

“It’s the morning. I want you to tell me that again tonight, when we’re in bed together.”

My God, who am I?! Why am I saying these things? So he won’t suspect anything? Why don’t I just behave like I do every morning and play the efficient wife tending to her family’s well-being? What are these displays of affection? If I start to be too affectionate, it may raise suspicions.

“I can’t live without you,” he says, returning to his place at the table.

I’m lost. But, strangely, I don’t feel the least bit guilty about what happened yesterday.





WHEN I get to work, the editor-in-chief commends me. The article I suggested was published this morning.


“We’ve received a lot of e-mails for the newsroom, praising the story with the mysterious Cuban man. People want to know who he is. If he allows us to print his address, he’ll have work for quite a while.”

The Cuban shaman! If he reads the newspaper he’ll see he never told me any of what is in the article. I took everything from blogs on shamanism. Apparently, my crises aren’t limited to marital problems; now I’m starting to slip professionally.

I explain to the editor-in-chief about the moment the shaman looked in my eyes and threatened me if I revealed who he was. He says I shouldn’t believe in that sort of thing and asks if I can give his address to just one person: his wife.

“She’s been pretty stressed.”

Everyone’s pretty stressed, including the shaman. I can’t promise anything, but I’ll talk to him.

He asks me to call right now. I do it, and I’m surprised by the Cuban man’s reaction. He thanks me for being honest and for keeping his identity a secret and praises my knowledge on the subject. I thank him, tell him about the reaction to the article, and ask if we can arrange another meeting.

“But we talked for two hours! The material you have must be more than enough!”

That’s not the way journalism works, I explain. What was published used very little from those two hours. Most of it I had to research. Now I need to approach the subject in a different way.

My boss is still standing next to me, listening to my side of the conversation and gesturing. Finally, when the shaman is almost ready to hang up, I insist that the article was lacking. I need to explore the female role in this “spiritual” quest, and my boss’s wife would like to meet him. He laughs. I will never break the deal I made with him, but I insist that everyone knows where he lives and the days he works.

Please, take it or leave it. If you don’t want to take the conversation further, I will find someone who will. There is no shortage of people claiming to be experts in treating patients on the verge of nervous breakdown. Your method is different, but you aren’t the only spiritual healer in the city. Many others, mostly Africans, have contacted us this morning looking to bring visibility to their work, earn money, and meet important people who could protect them in the event of a possible deportation case.

The Cuban is reluctant at first, but his vanity and fear of competition finally speak louder. We arrange to meet at his house in the village of Veyrier. I’m eager to see how he lives—it will liven up the article.


We are in the small living room converted into an office in his home. On the wall are diagrams that look imported from India: the locations of energy centers, the soles of the feet with their meridians. Several crystals rest on top of a piece of furniture.

We’ve already had a very interesting conversation about the role of women in shamanist rituals. He explains to me that at birth we all have moments of revelation, and this is even more common with women. As any scholar can see, the goddesses of agriculture are always female, and medicinal herbs were introduced to cave-dwelling tribes by the hands of women. They are much more sensitive to the spiritual and emotional world, and this makes them prone to crises that doctors used to call “hysteria” and today are called “bipolar”—the tendency to go from absolute euphoria to profound sadness several times a day. For the Cuban man, the spirits are much more inclined to speak with women than with men, because they better understand a language that is not expressed in words.

I try to speak his language: Because of this oversensitivity, might there be the possibility of, say, an evil spirit driving women to do things we don’t want?

He doesn’t understand my question. I rephrase it. If women are unstable enough to go from happiness to sadness …

“Did I use the word ‘unstable’? I didn’t. Quite the contrary. Despite their heightened sensitivity, women are more steadfast than men.”

Like in love, for example. He agrees. I tell him everything that happened to me, and I begin to sob. He is unmoved. But his heart is not made of stone.

“When it comes to adultery, meditation helps little or not at all. In this case, the person is happy with what is occurring. They are maintaining the security of their relationship at the same time they experience adventure. It’s the ideal situation.”

What leads people to commit adultery?

“That’s not my area. I have a very personal view of the subject, but that shouldn’t be published.”

Please help me.

He lights some incense, asks me to sit in front of him with my legs crossed, and then settles into the same position. Previously severe, he now seems like a kind wise man, who is trying to help me.

“If married people, for whatever reason, decide to look for another partner, this does not necessarily mean that the couple’s relationship is not doing well. Nor do I believe that sex is the primary motive. It has more to do with boredom, with a lack of passion for life, with a shortage of challenges. It’s a combination of factors.”

And why does this happen?

“Because, ever since we’ve moved away from God, we live a fragmented existence. We try to find oneness, but we don’t know the way back; thus, we are in a state of constant dissatisfaction. Society prohibits and creates laws, but this does not solve the problem.”

I feel lighter, as if I’ve already acquired a different outlook. I can see it in his eyes: he knows what he’s saying because he’s already been through it.

“I met a man who was impotent when he was with his lover. Yet he loved being by her side, and she also felt good next to him.”

I can’t control myself. I ask if this man is him.

“Yes. My wife left me because of it. Which is no reason for such a drastic decision.”

And how did you react?

“I could have summoned spiritual assistance, but I would have paid for this in my next life. But I needed to understand why she had acted as she did. In order to resist the temptation to bring her back using magic, I started to study the subject.”

Grudgingly, the Cuban man takes on a professorial air.

“Researchers from the University of Texas in Austin tried to answer the question so many people pose: Why do men cheat more than women when they know that this behavior is self-destructive and will cause the people they love to suffer? The conclusion was that men and women have exactly the same desire to cheat as their partner. It just happens that women have more self-control.”

He looks at his watch. I ask that he please continue—perhaps he is glad to open up his soul.

“Brief encounters without any emotional involvement on the part of the man, and with the sole aim of satisfying sexual urges, enable the preservation and proliferation of the species. Intelligent women should not blame men for this. They try to resist, but they are biologically inclined to do it. Am I being too technical?”

No.

“Have you noticed how human beings are more frightened by spiders and snakes than by automobiles despite the fact that deaths from traffic accidents are much more frequent? This occurs because our minds are still living in caveman times, when snakes and spiders were lethal. The same thing happens with a man’s need to have multiple women. In those times he went hunting, and nature taught him that preservation of the species is a priority; you must get as many women pregnant as possible.”

And didn’t the women also think about preserving the species?

“Of course they did. But while man’s commitment to the species lasts, at most, eleven minutes, for the woman, each child means at least nine months of pregnancy. Not to mention having to take care of the offspring, feed it, and protect it from danger like spiders and snakes. So your instincts were developed differently. Affection and self-control became more important.”

He is talking about himself. He is trying to justify what he did. I look around at those Indian maps, the crystals, the incense. Deep down we’re all the same. We make the same mistakes and walk around with the same unanswered questions.

The Cuban man looks at his watch again and says our time is up. Another client will be arriving, and he tries to keep his patients from crossing paths in the waiting room. He gets up and walks me to the door.

“I don’t want to be rude, but please, don’t look me up again. I already told you everything I had to say.”





IT’S IN the Bible:



It happened, late one afternoon, when David arose from his couch and was walking on the roof of the king’s house, that he saw from the roof a woman bathing; and the woman was very beautiful. And David sent and inquired about the woman.

And one said, “Is not this Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?” So David sent messengers and took her, and she came to him, and he lay with her. Then she returned to her house. And the woman conceived, and she sent and told David, “I am pregnant.”


Then David ordered that Uriah, a warrior faithful to him, be sent to the battlefront on a dangerous mission. He was killed and Bathsheba went to live with the king in his palace.

David—the great example, the idol for generations, the fearless warrior—not only committed adultery, he also ordered the murder of his rival, betraying his loyalty and goodwill.

I don’t need biblical justification for adultery or murder. But I remember this story from my school days—the same school where Jacob and I kissed in the spring.

Those kisses had to wait many years to be repeated, and when it finally happened, it was exactly as I hadn’t imagined. It seemed sordid, selfish, sinister. But I loved it anyway and wanted it to happen again, as soon as possible.

Jacob and I meet four times in two weeks. The nervousness gradually disappears. We have both normal and unconventional intercourse. I’m still not able to live out my fantasy of tying him up and making him kiss me down below until I can’t bear the pleasure, but I’ll get there.





LITTLE by little, Marianne loses her importance. Yesterday, I was with her husband again, and that shows just how insignificant she is in all this. I no longer want Mme König to find out or even think of divorce, because this way I can have the pleasure of a lover without having to give up everything I’ve accomplished with hard work and self-control: my children, my husband, my job, and this house.


What will I do with the cocaine I’ve hidden, the cocaine that could be found at any moment? I spent a lot of money on it. I can’t try to resell it; I would be one step away from the Vandoeuvres prison. I vowed to never use it again. I could give it as a gift to the people I know who like it, but my reputation could be affected, or, worse, they might ask if I can get them more.

Achieving my dream of getting Jacob in bed took me to great heights and then brought me back down to reality. I discovered that although I thought it was love, what I am feeling is merely a crush, destined to end at any moment. And I’m not the least bit concerned with maintaining it: I already got the adventure, the pleasure of the transgression, the new sexual experiences, the joy. All without feeling a drop of remorse. I am giving myself the present that I deserve after behaving for so many years.

I am at peace. At least I was until today.

After so many days of sleeping well, I feel like the dragon has again emerged from the abyss from where it had been exiled.





AM I the problem or is it the coming of Christmas? This is the time of year that depresses me the most—and I’m not referring to a hormonal disorder or the absence of certain chemicals in the body. I am glad that things aren’t as over-the-top in Geneva as they are in other countries. I spent the holidays in New York once. Everywhere there were lights, tinsel, carolers, decorated windows, reindeer, bells, fake snowflakes, trees with ornaments in every size and color, smiles glued on everyone’s faces … And me, absolutely sure that I was a freak and the only one to feel completely alien. Although I’ve never taken LSD, I imagine you would need a triple dose of it to see all those colors.


The most we see here is a hint of decoration on the main street, most likely for the tourists. (Buy! Take something from Switzerland to your children!) But I still haven’t been by there yet, so this strange feeling can’t be Christmas. There isn’t a single Santa Claus hanging from a chimney, reminding us we should be happy the whole month of December.

I toss and turn in bed, as usual. My husband sleeps, as usual. Tonight we made love. This has become more frequent, I don’t know if it’s to cover up my affair or because my libido has been heightened. The fact is that I’ve been more sexually excited by him. He doesn’t ask me questions when I get home late, and he doesn’t show that he’s jealous. Except for the first time, when I had to rush straight to the bathroom, I follow Jacob’s instructions to eliminate all traces of odors and stained clothing. Now I always bring an extra pair of panties, take a shower at the hotel, and enter the elevator with flawless makeup. I don’t show any nervousness or raise suspicions. Twice I ran into people I know, and I made sure to say hello and leave them asking: “Is she meeting someone?” It’s good for the ego and absolutely safe. After all, if they’re in the elevator of a hotel in the same city where they live, they’re just as guilty as I am.

I fall asleep and then awake again a few minutes later. Victor Frankenstein created his monster, and Dr. Jekyll allowed his to come to the surface. This still doesn’t frighten me, but perhaps I need to go ahead and lay down a few rules for my behavior.

I have a side that is honest, kind, caring, professional, and capable of keeping my cool at difficult moments, especially during interviews, when some subjects prove aggressive or evade my questions.

But I am discovering a more spontaneous, impatient, wild side, one that is not confined to the hotel room where I meet with Jacob and one that is beginning to affect my daily routine. I am more easily irritated when a salesperson chats with a customer even though there’s a line. Now I go to the supermarket only out of necessity, and I’ve already stopped looking at prices and expiration dates. When someone says something I don’t agree with, I make a point of responding. I discuss politics. I defend movies everyone hates and criticize those everyone loves. I love surprising people with ridiculous and out-of-place opinions. In short, I’ve stopped being the reserved woman I always was.

People have started to notice. “You’re different!” they say. It’s one step away from “You’re hiding something,” which soon turns into “You only need to hide if you’re doing something you shouldn’t.”

I may just be paranoid, of course. But today I feel like two different people.

All David needed to do was order his men to bring him that woman. He didn’t owe anyone an explanation. And when trouble arose, he sent her husband to the battlefront. It’s different in my case. As discreet as the Swiss are, there are two situations when they become unrecognizable.

The first is in traffic. If someone lingers a fraction of a second to start his car after the light turns green, we immediately start to honk. If someone changes lanes, even with a turn signal flashing, he will always get a dirty look in the rearview mirror.

The second concerns the dangerous event of change, whether it’s our house, job, or behavior. Here, everything is stable, everyone behaves as expected. Please don’t try to be different or suddenly reinvent yourself, because you’ll be threatening our whole society. This country worked hard to reach its “finished” state; we don’t want to go back to being “under renovation.”





MY ENTIRE family and I are at the place where William, Victor Frankenstein’s brother, was murdered. For centuries, this was a swamp. After Calvin’s ruthless hands turned Geneva into a respectable city, the sick were brought here, usually to die of hunger and exposure, and thus keeping the city from being infected by any epidemics.


Plainpalais is huge, the only spot in the city center with virtually no greenery. In winter, the wind is bone-chilling. In summer, the sun makes us drip with sweat. It’s ridiculous. But since when have things needed a good reason to exist?

It’s Saturday and there are antiques vendors with stalls scattered all around. This market has become a tourist attraction and even appears in travel guides as a “good thing to do.” Sixteenth-century relics intermingle with VCRs. Antique bronze sculptures from the remote corners of Asia are displayed alongside horrible furniture from the eighties. The place is swarming with people. A few connoisseurs patiently examine a piece and talk at length with the vendors. The majority, tourists and onlookers, find things they will never need but end up buying because they’re so cheap. They return home, use them once, and then put them in the garage, thinking: “It’s completely useless, but it was a bargain.”

I have to keep the children under control the entire time; they want to touch everything, from valuable crystal vases to fancy toys from the turn of the nineteenth century. But at least they’re learning that intelligent life exists beyond video games.

One of them asks me if we can buy a metal clown with a movable mouth and limbs. My husband knows their interest in the toy will last only until we get home. He says it’s “old” and that we can buy something new on the way back. At the same time, their attention is diverted by some boxes of marbles, which children used to play with in the backyard.

My eyes fixate on a small painting; it’s of a nude woman, lying in bed, and an angel in the process of turning away. I ask the vendor how much it costs. Before telling me the price (a pittance), he explains that it’s a reproduction done by a local unknown painter. My husband observes us without saying a word and, before I can thank the man for the information and move on, he’s already paid for it.

Why did you do that?

“It represents an ancient myth. When we get back home I’ll tell you the story.”

I want to fall in love with him again. I never stopped loving him—I’ve always loved him and always will—but our life together is verging on monotony. Love can withstand this, but for lust, it’s fatal.

I am going through an extremely tough time. I know my relationship with Jacob has no future and I’ve turned my back on the man with whom I’ve built a life.

Whoever says “love is enough” is lying. It isn’t and it never has been. The big problem is that people believe what they see in books and movies—the couple that strolls along the beach holding hands, gazes at the sunset, and makes passionate love every day in nice hotels overlooking the Alps. My husband and I have done all that, but the magic lasts only one or two years, at most.

Then comes marriage. Choosing and decorating the house, planning the nursery for the children to come, kisses, dreams, a champagne toast in the empty living room that will soon be exactly as we imagined—everything in its place. Two years after the first child is born, the house has no more room and, if we add something, we risk looking like we live to impress others and will spend the rest of our lives buying and cleaning antiques (which will later be sold for a song by our heirs and eventually wind up at the Plainpalais market).

After three years of marriage, a person already knows exactly what the other wants and thinks. At dinner parties we are obliged to listen to the same stories we’ve heard time and time again, always feigning surprise and, occasionally, having to confirm them. Sex goes from being a passion to a duty, and that’s why it becomes increasingly sporadic. Before long it happens only once a week—if that. Women hang out and brag of their husbands’ insatiable fire, which is nothing but an outright lie. Everyone knows this, but no one wants to be left behind.

Then comes the time for the extramarital affairs. Women talk—do they ever!—about their lovers and their insatiable fire. There’s an element of truth in this, because more often than not it’s happening in the enchanted world of masturbation—just as real as that of the women who let themselves be wooed by the first man who appeared, regardless of his attributes. They buy expensive clothes and pretend to be modest, even though they’re exhibiting more sensuality than a sixteen-year-old girl—the only difference being that the girl knows the power she holds.

Finally, the time comes to resign ourselves to the monotony. The husband spends hours away from home, wrapped up in work, and the wife dedicates more time than necessary to taking care of the children. We are at this stage, and I am willing to do anything to change it.

Love alone is not enough. I need to fall in love with my husband.

Love isn’t just a feeling; it’s an art. And like any art, it takes not only inspiration, but also a lot of work.





Why is the angel turning away and leaving the woman alone in the bed?

“It’s not an angel. It’s Eros, the Greek god of love. The girl in the bed with him is Psyche.”

I open a bottle of wine and fill our glasses. He puts the painting above the unlit fireplace—often just a decorative feature in homes with central heating. Then he begins:

“Once upon a time there was a beautiful princess who was admired by all, but no one dared to ask for her hand in marriage. In despair, the king consulted the god Apollo. He told him that Psyche should be dressed in mourning and left alone on top of a mountain. Before daybreak, a serpent would come to meet and marry her. The king obeyed, and all night the princess waited for her husband to appear, deathly afraid and freezing cold. Finally, she slept. When she awoke, she found herself crowned a queen in a beautiful palace. Every night her husband came to her and they made love, but he had imposed one condition: Psyche could have all she desired, but she had to trust him completely and could never see his face.”

How awful, I think, but I don’t dare interrupt him.

“The young woman lived happily for a long time. She had comfort, affection, joy, and she was in love with the man who visited her every night. However, occasionally she was afraid that she was married to a hideous serpent. Early one morning, while her husband slept, she lit a lantern and saw Eros, a man of incredible beauty, lying by her side. The light woke him, and seeing that the woman he loved was unable to fulfill his one request, Eros vanished. Desperate to get her lover back, Psyche submitted to a series of tasks given to her by Aphrodite, Eros’s mother. Needless to say, her mother-in-law was incredibly jealous of Psyche’s beauty and she did everything she could to thwart the couple’s reconciliation. In one of the tasks, Psyche opened a box that makes her fall into a deep sleep.”

I grow anxious to find out how the story will end.

“Eros was also in love and regretted not having been more lenient toward his wife. He managed to enter the castle and wake her with the tip of his arrow. ‘You nearly died because of your curiosity,’ he told her. ‘You sought security in knowledge and destroyed our relationship.’ But in love, nothing is destroyed forever. Imbued with this conviction, they go to Zeus, the god of gods, and beg that their union never be undone. Zeus passionately pleaded the cause of the lovers with strong arguments and threats until he gained Aphrodite’s support. From that day on, Psyche (our unconscious, but logical, side) and Eros (love) were together forever.”

I pour another glass of wine. I rest my head on his shoulder.

“Those who cannot accept this, and who always try to find an explanation for magical and mysterious human relationships, will miss the best part of life.”

Today I feel like Psyche on the cliff, cold and afraid. But if I can overcome this night and give in to the mystery and faith in life, I will awake in a palace. All I need is time.





THE BIG day finally arrives when both couples will be together at a reception given by an important local TV presenter. We talked about it yesterday in bed at the hotel while Jacob smoked his customary cigarette before getting dressed and leaving.


I couldn’t turn down the invitation because I’d already sent my RSVP. So had he, and changing his mind now would be terrible for his career.

I arrive with my husband at the TV station, and we are told the party is on the top floor. My phone rings before we get in the elevator, and I am forced to leave the queue and stay in the lobby, talking with my boss, while others arrive, smiling at me and my husband and nodding discreetly. Apparently, I know almost everyone.

My boss says my articles with the Cuban shaman—the second of which was published yesterday despite having been written more than a month ago—are a big hit. I have to write one more to complete the series. I explain that the man doesn’t want to speak with me anymore. He asks me to find someone else “in the industry,” because there is nothing less interesting than conventional opinions (psychologists, sociologists, et cetera). I don’t know anyone “in the industry,” but as I need to hang up, I promise to think about it.

Jacob and Mme König walk by and greet us with a nod. My boss was just about to hang up, but I decide to continue the conversation. God forbid we have to go up in the same elevator! “How about we put a cattle herder and a Protestant minister together?” I suggest. “Wouldn’t it be interesting to record their conversation about how they deal with stress or boredom?” The boss says it’s a great idea, but it would be even better to find someone “in the industry.” Right, I’ll try. The doors have closed and the elevator is gone. I can hang up without fear.

I explain to my boss that I don’t want to be the last one to arrive at the reception. I’m two minutes late. We live in Switzerland, where the clocks are always right.

Yes, I have behaved strangely over the last few months, but one thing hasn’t changed: I hate going to parties. I can’t understand why people enjoy them.

Yes, people enjoy them. Even when it comes to something professional like tonight’s cocktail hour—that’s right, a cocktail hour, not party—they get dressed up, put on makeup, and tell their friends, not without a certain air of ennui, that unfortunately they’ll be busy Tuesday because of the reception celebrating ten years of Pardonnez-moi as presented by the handsome, intelligent, and photogenic Darius Rochebin. Everyone who’s “anyone” will be there, and the rest will have to settle for the photos that will be published in the only celebrity magazine for the entire population of French-speaking Switzerland.

Going to parties like this gives status and visibility. Occasionally our newspaper covers this type of event, and the day after we’ll receive phone calls from aides to important people, asking if the photos where they appear might be published and saying they would be extremely grateful. The next best thing to being invited is seeing your presence garner the spotlight it deserved. And there is nothing that better proves this than appearing in the newspaper wearing an outfit specially made for the occasion (although this is never admitted) and the same smile from all the other parties and receptions. Good thing I’m not the editor of the social column; in my current state as Victor Frankenstein’s monster, I would have already been fired.

The elevator doors open. There are two or three photographers in the lobby. We proceed to the main hall, which has a 360-degree view of the city. It looks like the eternal cloud decided to cooperate with Darius and lifted its gray cloak; we can see the sea of lights below.

I don’t want to stay long, I tell my husband. And I start chattering to ease the tension.

“We’ll leave whenever you want,” he interrupts.

The next moment we are busy greeting an infinite number of people who treat me as if I were a close friend. I reciprocate even though I don’t know their names. If the conversation drags on, I have a foolproof trick: I introduce my husband and say nothing. He introduces himself and asks the other person’s name. I listen to the answer and repeat, loud and clear: “Honey, don’t you remember so-and-so?”

So cynical!

I finish greeting them, and we go to a corner where I complain: Why do people have a habit of asking whether we remember them? There’s nothing more embarrassing. They all consider themselves important enough to be etched in my memory, even though I meet new people every day because of my job.

“Be more forgiving. People are having fun.”

My husband doesn’t know what he’s talking about. People are just pretending to have fun. What they’re really looking for is visibility, attention, and—every now and then—the opportunity to meet someone and close a business deal. The fate of people who think they’re so beautiful and powerful as they walk down the red carpet lies in the hands of an underpaid guy from the news department. The paginator receives the photos via e-mail and decides who should or shouldn’t appear in our small world of traditions and conventions. He is the one who places images of people of interest in the paper, leaving a small space for the famous photo with an overview of the party (or cocktail hour, or dinner, or reception). There, with a little luck, one or another might be recognized among the anonymous people who consider themselves very important.

Darius takes the stage and begins to share his experiences with all the important people he interviewed during his program’s ten-year span. I’m able to relax a bit and go to one of the windows with my husband. My internal radar already detected Jacob and Mme König. I want distance, and I imagine Jacob does, too.

“Is there something wrong?”

I knew it. Are you Dr. Jekyll or Mr. Hyde today? Victor Frankenstein or his monster?

No, darling. I’m just avoiding the man I went to bed with yesterday. I suspect that everyone in this room knows it, and that the word “lovers” is written on our foreheads.

I smile and say something he’s tired of hearing, that I’m too old to go to parties. I would love to be home right now, taking care of our children instead of having left them with a babysitter. I’m not much of a drinker—I already get confused with all these people saying hello to me and making conversation. I have to feign interest in what they’re saying and respond with a question before I can finally put the hors d’oeuvre in my mouth and finish chewing without seeming rude.

A screen is lowered and a video clip starts, featuring the most important guests who’ve been on the program. I’ve worked with some of them, but most of them are foreigners visiting Geneva. As we all know, there’s always someone important in this city, and going on the show is obligatory.

“Let’s leave, then. He already saw you. We’ve done our social duty. Let’s rent a movie and enjoy the rest of the night together.”

No. We’ll stay a little longer, because Jacob and Mme König are here. It might seem suspicious to leave the party before the ceremony ends. Darius starts calling some of his show’s guests to the stage, and they make a short statement about the experience. I nearly die of boredom. Unaccompanied men start looking around, discreetly seeking single women. The women, in turn, look at one another: how they’re dressed, what makeup they’re wearing, if they’re here with husbands or lovers.

I look out at the city, lost in absent thoughts, just waiting for time to pass so we can leave quietly without arousing suspicion.

“It’s you!”

Me?

“Darling, he’s calling your name!”

Darius just invited me to the stage and I hadn’t heard. Yes, I had been on his show with the ex-president of Switzerland to talk about human rights. But I’m not that important. I never imagined this; it hadn’t been arranged, and I didn’t prepare anything to say.

But Darius gestures to me. The people all look my way, smiling. I walk toward him. I’ve regained my composure and am secretly happy, because Marianne wasn’t called, nor will she be. Jacob wasn’t called up, either, because the idea is for the evening to be enjoyable, not filled with political speeches.

I climb the makeshift stage—it’s a staircase linking the two areas of the hall at the top of the TV tower—give Darius a kiss, and start telling an uninteresting story about when I went on the show. The men continue their hunt, and the women continue looking at one another. Those nearest the stage pretend to be interested in what I’m saying. I keep my eyes on my husband; everyone who speaks in public has to choose someone to serve as support.

In the middle of my impromptu speech, I see something that absolutely should not happen: Jacob and Marianne König are standing next to my husband. All this had to have happened in the less than two minutes it took me to get to the stage and start the speech that, at this point, is already making the waiters circulate and most of the guests look away from the stage in search of something more attractive.

I say thank you as quickly as possible. The guests applaud. Darius gives me a kiss. I try to get to my husband and the Königs, but am waylaid by people who praise me for things I didn’t say and claim I was wonderful. They’re delighted with the series of articles on shamanism and suggest topics, hand me business cards, and discreetly offer themselves as “sources” on something that could be “very interesting.” All this takes about ten minutes. When I finally approach my destination, the three are smiling. They congratulate me, say I’m a great public speaker, and deliver the bad news:

“I explained to them that you’re tired and that our children are with the babysitter,” my husband says, “but Mme König insists on having dinner together.”

“I do. I suppose no one here has had dinner?” says Marianne.

Jacob has a fake smile on his face and agrees like a lamb to the slaughter.

In a split second, two hundred thousand excuses run through my head. But why? I have a fair amount of cocaine ready to be used at any moment, and what better than this “opportunity” to see if I’ll carry out my plan.

Besides, I have a morbid curiosity to see how this dinner goes.

It would be our pleasure, Mme König.


Marianne chooses the restaurant at Hotel Les Armures, which shows a certain lack of originality, as that’s where everyone usually takes their foreign visitors. The fondue is excellent, the staff strives to speak every language possible, and it’s located in the heart of the old city … but for someone who lives in Geneva, it is definitely nothing new.

We arrive after the Königs. Jacob is outside, enduring the cold in the name of his nicotine addiction. Marianne has already gone in. I suggest my husband also go in and keep her company while I wait for Mr. König to finish smoking. He says that the reverse would be better, but I insist—it wouldn’t be polite to leave two women alone at the table, even if just for a few minutes.

“The invitation caught me off guard, too,” says Jacob, as soon as my husband is gone.

I try to act as though nothing is wrong. Are you feeling guilty? Worried about a potential end to your unhappy marriage (with that stone-cold bitch, I’d like to add)?

“It’s not about that. It’s that—”

We’re interrupted by the bitch. A devilish grin on her lips, she greets me (again!) with the three customary pecks on the cheek and orders her husband to put out his cigarette and come inside. I read between the lines: I’m suspicious of you two and think you must be planning something, but look, I’m clever, much more intelligent than you think.

We order the usual: fondue and raclette. My husband says he’s tired of eating cheese and picks something different: a sausage that is on the visitor menu. We also order wine, but Jacob doesn’t sniff, swirl, taste, and nod—that was just a dumb way of impressing me on the first day. While we wait for the food and make small talk, we finish the first bottle, which is soon replaced by a second. I ask my husband not to drink anymore, or we’ll have to leave the car again, and we’re much farther away from home than we were the previous time.

The food arrives. We open a third bottle of wine. The small talk continues; Jacob’s new routine as a member of the Council of States, congratulations for my two articles on stress (“a rather unusual approach”), and if it’s true the price of real estate will fall now that banking secrecy is disappearing and if the thousands of bankers will go with it. They are moving to Singapore or Dubai, where we spend the holiday season.

I keep waiting for the bull to enter the arena. But it doesn’t, and I lower my guard. I drink a bit more than I should and start to feel relaxed and cheerful. Then the doors swing wide open.

“The other day I was talking with some friends about the stupid feeling of jealousy,” says Marianne König. “What do you think about it?”

What do we think about a topic that no one talks about at dinner? The bitch knows how to choose her words well. She must have spent the whole day thinking about it. She called jealousy a “stupid feeling,” intending to leave me more exposed and vulnerable.

“I grew up witnessing terrible displays of jealousy at home,” says my husband.

What? He’s talking about his private life? To a stranger?

“So I promised myself I would never let that happen to me if I ever got married. It was hard at first, because our instinct is to control everything, even the uncontrollable, like love and fidelity. But I did it. And my wife, who meets with other people every day and sometimes comes home later than usual, has never heard a criticism or an insinuation from me.”

I’ve never heard this explanation. I didn’t know he’d grown up with jealousy all around him. The bitch manages to make everyone obey her command: let’s have dinner, put out your cigarette, talk about the topic I picked.

There are two reasons for what my husband just said. The first is that he is suspicious of her invitation and is trying to protect me. The second: he is telling me, in front of everyone, how important I am to him. I reach out my hand and touch his. I never imagined this. I thought he simply wasn’t interested in what I did.

“And what about you, Linda? Don’t you get jealous of your husband?”

Me?

Of course not. I trust him completely. I think jealousy is for sick, insecure people with no self-esteem, people who feel inferior and believe anyone can threaten their relationship. And you?

Marianne is caught in her own trap.

“Like I said, I think it’s a stupid feeling.”

Yes, you already said that. But if you found out your husband was cheating, what would you do?

Jacob goes pale. He restrains himself from drinking the entire contents of his wineglass.

“I believe my husband meets insecure people every day who must be dying of boredom in their own marriage and are destined to have a mediocre and repetitive life. I imagine there are some people like that in your line of work, too, who will go from junior reporter straight to retirement …”

“Many,” I reply with zero emotion in my voice. I help myself to more fondue. She stares me right in the eyes. I know you’re talking about me, but I don’t want my husband to suspect anything. I don’t care one bit about her and Jacob, who must have confessed everything, unable to stand the pressure.

My cool surprises me. Maybe it’s the wine or the monster having fun with all this. Maybe it’s the immense pleasure of being able to confront a woman who thinks she knows everything. “Go on,” I say, as I dunk the piece of bread in the melted cheese.

“As you all know, these unloved women aren’t a threat to me. Unlike you, I don’t have complete trust in Jacob. I know he’s already cheated on me a few times. The flesh is weak …”

Jacob laughs nervously and has another sip of wine. The bottle’s empty; Marianne motions to the waiter to bring another.

“… but I try to see it as part of a normal relationship. If my man wasn’t desired and pursued by these sluts, then he must be completely uninteresting. Instead of jealousy, you know what I feel? Horniness. I often take off my clothes, approach him naked, spread my legs, and ask him to do to me exactly what he did with them. Sometimes I ask him to tell me how it was, and this makes me come many times.”

“That’s all in Marianne’s fantasies,” says Jacob, rather unconvincingly. “She makes these things up. The other day she asked if I would like to go to a swingers club in Lausanne.”

He’s not joking, of course, but everyone laughs, including her.

To my horror, I discover that Jacob is enjoying being labeled the “unfaithful male.” My husband seems very interested in Marianne’s reply and asks her to talk a bit more about the arousal she gets from knowing about the extramarital affairs. He asks for the address of the swingers club and gazes at me, his eyes shining. He says it’s about time we tried something different. I don’t know if he’s trying to manage the almost unbearable atmosphere at the table or if he is actually interested in trying. Marianne says she doesn’t know the address, but if he gives her his phone number, she’ll send it to him by text.

Time to spring into action. I say that, in general, jealous people will try to show exactly the opposite in public. They love to make insinuations and see if they can get some information about their partner’s behavior, but are naïve to think they’ll succeed. I, for example, could be having an affair with your husband and you would never know, because I’m not stupid enough to fall for that trap.

My tone changes slightly. My husband looks at me, surprised at my answer.

“Darling, don’t you think that’s going a little far?”

No, I don’t. I’m not the one who started this conversation, and I don’t know what Mme König is driving at. But ever since we got here she hasn’t stopped insinuating things, and I’m sick of it. By the way, have you noticed how she’s been staring at me the whole time we’ve been talking about something that’s of no interest to anyone at this table but her?

Marianne looks at me, stunned. I think she didn’t expect a reaction because she’s used to controlling everything.

I say that I’ve met a lot of people who are driven by obsessive jealousy, and not because they think their husband or wife is committing adultery, but because they would like to be the center of attention all the time, and they’re not. Jacob calls the waiter and asks for the bill. Great. After all, they were the ones who invited us and who should bear the expense.

I look at my watch and pretend to be greatly surprised; it’s already past the time we gave the babysitter! I get up, thank them for dinner, and go to the cloakroom to get my coat. The conversation has already shifted to children and the responsibilities they bring.

“Do you think she really thought I was talking about her?” I hear Marianne asking my husband.

“Of course not. There would be no reason for that.”

We go out into the cold air, not saying much. I’m angry, anxious, and I volunteer without being prompted that yes, she was talking about me, and that that woman is so neurotic that on election day she also made several insinuations. She’s always wanting to show off—she must be dying of jealousy over the jerk whose “proper behavior” she controls with an iron fist so he has some future in politics, even though she’s really the one who’d like to be campaigning for what is right or wrong.

My husband says that I’ve had too much to drink and should calm down.

We walk in front of a cathedral. Mist covers the city again and makes everything look like we’re in a horror movie. I imagine Marianne waiting for me in a corner with a dagger, like in the days Geneva was a medieval city and in constant battle with the French.

Neither the cold nor the walk calms me down. We get the car, and when we arrive home I go directly to the bedroom and swallow two Valiums while my husband pays the babysitter and puts the kids to bed.

I sleep for ten hours straight. The next day, when I get up for the usual morning routine, I start to think my husband is a little less affectionate. It’s almost imperceptible, but still something yesterday made him uncomfortable. I’m not sure what to do—I’ve never taken two tranquilizers at once, and am experiencing a lethargy that’s nothing like the one loneliness and unhappiness caused.

I leave for work and automatically check my phone. There’s a text from Jacob. I’m hesitant to open it, but curiosity is greater than hate.

It was sent this morning, very early.

“You blew it. She had no idea that there was something between us, but now she’s sure. You fell into a trap she didn’t set.”





I HAVE to stop by the damn supermarket to buy groceries, feeling frustrated and unloved. Marianne is right; I’m nothing more than a sexual hobby for the stupid dog sleeping in her bed. I drive dangerously because I can’t stop crying, the tears keeping me from seeing the other cars clearly. I hear honking and complaints. I try to slow down; I hear more honking and more complaints.


If it was stupid to let Marianne suspect something, it was even more stupid to risk everything I have—my husband, my family, my job.

Driving under the delayed effects of two tranquilizers and with frazzled nerves, I realize that I am also putting my life at risk. I park on a side street and cry. My sobs are so loud that someone approaches and asks if I need help. I say no and the person walks away. But the truth is I do need help—a lot. I’m plunging deeper into my inner self, into its sea of mud, and I can’t swim.

I’m blinded by hatred. I imagine that Jacob has already recovered from yesterday’s dinner and will never want to see me again. It’s my fault for wanting to go beyond my limits, for always thinking that my behavior is suspicious, that everyone knows what I am doing. Maybe it’s a good idea to call and apologize, but I know he won’t answer. Maybe it’s better to call my husband and see if he’s okay? I know his voice. I know when he’s angry and tense, even though he’s a master at self-control. But I don’t want to know. I’m really scared. My stomach is churning, and my hands clench around the steering wheel. I allow myself to cry as loud as I can, to shout and make a scene in the only safe place on earth: my car. The person who approached me is now eyeing me from afar, afraid I’ll do something stupid. No, I won’t do anything. I just want to cry. Is that too much to ask?

I feel like I inflicted this abuse on myself. I want to go back in time, only that’s impossible. I need to make a plan to regain lost ground, but I can’t think straight. All I can do is cry, feeling ashamed and hateful.

How could I have been so naïve? Thinking that Marianne was looking at me and saying what I already knew? Because I felt guilty, like a criminal. I wanted to humiliate her, to destroy her in front of her husband so she wouldn’t see me as just a pastime. I know I don’t love him, but he has slowly been giving me back some of the joy I’d lost, keeping me from the pit of loneliness I had been drowning in up to my neck. And now I am realizing that those days are gone forever. I have to come back to reality, to the supermarket, to the days that are all alike, and to the safety of my home—something that was once so important to me, but had started feeling like a prison. I need to pick up the pieces that are still left. Perhaps confess everything that happened to my husband.

I know he’ll understand. He’s a good, intelligent man who always puts family first. But what if he doesn’t understand? What if he decides that he’s had enough, that we’ve reached our limit and he’s tired of living with a woman who started off complaining of depression and now laments being left by her lover?

My sobbing wanes and I start to think. Work awaits, and I can’t spend the whole day sitting in this street filled with the homes of happy couples who have Christmas decorations on their doors, with people coming and going without noticing I’m there. I can’t watch my world collapse and not do anything about it.

I need to reflect. I have to draw up a list of priorities. In the coming days, months, and years, will I be able to pretend I’m a devoted wife instead of a wounded animal? Discipline has never been my strong suit, but I can’t behave like I’m unstable.

I dry my tears and look straight ahead. Time to start the car? Not yet. I wait a bit longer. If there is one reason to be happy about what happened, it’s that I was tired of living a lie. How long before my husband suspected something? Can men tell when their wives fake an orgasm? It’s possible, but I have no way of knowing.

I get out of the car and pay for more parking time than necessary. That way I can walk around aimlessly. I call in to work and give a lame excuse: one of the kids had diarrhea and I need to take him to the doctor. My boss believes it; after all, the Swiss don’t lie.

But I do lie. I’ve been lying every day. I’ve lost my self-respect and I don’t know where I’m headed anymore. The Swiss live in the real world. I live in a fantasy one. The Swiss know how to solve their problems. Incapable of solving my own, I created a situation where I had the ideal family and the perfect lover.


I walk through this city that I love, looking at its shops and businesses that—with the exception of places for tourists—seem to have frozen in the fifties and don’t have the slightest intention of modernizing. It’s cold, but not windy, thank God, which makes the temperature bearable. Trying to distract myself and calm down, I stop in a bookstore, a butcher shop, and a clothing store. Each time I go back out into the street, I feel like the low temperatures are helping put out the bonfire I’ve become.

Can you train yourself to love the right man? Of course you can. The problem is forgetting about the wrong man, the one passing by who came in a door that was left open without asking permission.

What exactly did I want from Jacob? I knew from the beginning that our relationship was doomed, although I never imagined it would end in such a humiliating way. Maybe I just wanted what I got: adventure and joy. Or maybe I wanted more—to live with him, to help him grow his career, and to give him the support he no longer seemed to get from his wife and the affection he complained he lacked at one of our first meetings. To pluck him from his home, the way you pluck a flower from someone else’s garden, and plant him on my land, even though I know flowers can’t survive being treated that way.

I’m hit with a wave of jealousy, but this time there are no tears, just anger. I stop walking and sit on a bench at a random bus stop. I watch the people coming and going, all so busy in their own worlds, tiny enough to fit on the screen of the smartphones from which they are unable to unglue their eyes and ears.

Buses come and go. People get off and walk quickly, maybe because of the cold. Others board slowly, not wanting to get home, to work, or to school. But no one shows any anger or enthusiasm; they’re not happy or sad, just poor souls mechanically carrying out the mission that the universe assigned on the day they were born.

After a while I manage to relax a little. I’ve figured out a few pieces of my inner puzzle. One of them is the reason why this hatred comes and goes, like the buses at this stop. I may have lost the thing that’s most important to me in life: my family. I’ve been defeated in the battle to find happiness, and this not only humiliates me, it keeps me from seeing the way forward.

And my husband? I need to have a frank conversation with him tonight and confess everything. I feel like this will set me free, even if I have to suffer the consequences. I’m tired of lying—to him, to my boss, to myself.

I just don’t want to think about this now. More than anything else, it’s jealousy that eats away at my thoughts. I can’t get up from this bus stop because it’s as though there are chains attached to my body. They are heavy and difficult to haul around.

You mean she likes hearing stories about his infidelities while she’s in bed with her husband and doing the same things he did with me? I should have realized he had other women when he took the condom from the nightstand. I should have known I was just one more by the way he took me. Many times I left that damn hotel feeling that way, telling myself I wouldn’t see him again—all the while aware that this was just another one of my lies and that if he called, I would always be ready, whenever and wherever he wanted.

Yes, I knew all that. And yet I tried to convince myself I was only looking for sex and some adventure. But it wasn’t true. Today I realize that yes, I was in love, despite having denied it on all my sleepless nights and empty days. Madly in love.

I don’t know what to do. I guess—in fact, I’m sure—that all married people always have a secret crush. It’s forbidden, and flirting with the forbidden is what makes life interesting. But few people take it further; only one in seven, according to the article I read in the newspaper. And I think only one in a hundred is capable of getting confused enough to be carried away by the fantasy, like I did. For most, it’s nothing more than a fling, something you know from the beginning won’t last long. A little thrill to make sex more erotic and hear “I love you” shouted out at the moment of orgasm. Nothing more.

And what if it had been my husband who’d found a mistress? How would I have reacted? It would have been extreme. I would have said that life is unfair, that I’m worthless, and I’m getting old. I’d have screamed bloody murder, I’d have cried nonstop from jealousy, which would have actually been envy—he can, and I can’t. I’d have left, slamming the door behind me, and taken the children to my parents’ house. Two or three months later I would have regretted it and tried to find some excuse to go back, imagining he would want the same. After four months, I would be terrified by the possibility of having to start all over again. After five months, I would have found a way to ask to come back “for the children,” but it would be too late: he would be living with his mistress, a much younger woman, pretty and full of energy, who had begun to make his life fun again.

The phone rings. My boss asks after my son. I say I’m at a bus stop and can’t hear well, but that everything’s fine and soon I’ll be at the paper.

A terrified person can never see reality, preferring to hide in their fantasies. I can’t go on like this for more than an hour. I have to pull myself together. My job is waiting, and it might help me.

I leave the bus stop and start walking back to my car. I look at the dead leaves on the ground. In Paris, they’d have already been swept up, I think. But we’re in Geneva, a much wealthier city, and they’re still there.

These leaves were once part of a tree, a tree that has now gone to ground to prepare for a season of rest. Did the tree have any consideration for the green cloak that covered it, fed it, and enabled it to breathe? No. Did it think of the insects who lived there and helped pollinate its flowers and keep nature alive? No. The tree just thought about itself; some things, like leaves and insects, are discarded as needed.

I’m like one of those leaves on the city ground, who lived thinking it would be everlasting and died without knowing exactly why; who loved the sun and the moon and who watched those buses and rattling streetcars go by for a long time, and yet no one ever had the courtesy to let her know that winter existed. They lived it up, until one day they began to turn yellow and the tree bid them farewell.

It didn’t say “see you later” but “good-bye,” knowing the leaves would never be back. And it asked the wind for help loosening them from their branches and carrying them far away. The tree knows it can grow only if it rests. And if it grows, it will be respected. And can produce even more beautiful flowers.


Enough. Work is the best therapy now that I’ve cried all the tears and thought about everything I needed to think about. But I still can’t shake anything.

I get to the street where I parked on autopilot and find a guard in a red and blue uniform scanning my car’s license plate with a machine.

“Is this your vehicle?”

Yes.

He continues his work. I say nothing. The scanned plate has already entered the system. It’s been sent to the main office to be processed and will generate a letter with the discreet police seal in the cellophane window of an official envelope. I’ll have thirty days to pay 100 francs, but I can also challenge the fine and spend 500 francs on lawyers.

“You went over by twenty minutes. The maximum here is half an hour.”

I just nod. I see he’s surprised—I’m not pleading with him to stop and saying I’ll never do it again, nor did I run to stop him when I saw he was there. I had none of the reactions to which he’s accustomed.

A ticket comes out of the machine as if we’re in the supermarket. He places it in a plastic envelope (to protect it from the elements) and goes to the windshield to place it behind the wiper. I press the button on my key and the lights flash, indicating that a door was left open.

He realizes the foolishness of what he was about to do, but like me, he’s on autopilot. After the sound of the doors being unlocked jolts him, he walks up to me and hands me the ticket. We both leave happy. He didn’t have to handle any complaints, and I got a little of what I deserve: a punishment.





I’LL FIND out shortly if my husband is exercising the utmost self-control or if he really doesn’t give a damn about what happened.


I get home on time after another day of gathering information about the most trivial things in the world: pilot training, a surplus of Christmas trees on the market, and the introduction of electronic controls at railroad crossings. This made me extremely happy, because I was in no condition, physical or mental, to think much.

I prepare dinner as if this were just another evening among the thousands we’ve spent together. We spend some time watching TV while the children go up to their rooms, lured by the tablets or video games on which they kill terrorists or soldiers depending on the day.

I put the dishes in the dishwasher. My husband is going to try to put our kids to bed. So far we’ve only talked about our daily duties. I can’t tell if it was always like this and I never noticed, or if it’s especially strange today. I’ll find out soon.

While he’s upstairs, I light the fireplace for the first time this year. Watching the fire soothes me, and although I’m revealing something I expect he already knows, I need all the help I can get. I open a bottle of wine and prepare a plate of assorted cheeses. I take my first sip and stare at the flames. I don’t feel anxious or afraid. Enough with this double life. Whatever happens today will be better for me. If our marriage has to end, so be it; it will end on a late autumn day before Christmas, while watching the fireplace and talking like civilized people.

He comes downstairs, sees the scene I’ve prepared, and asks nothing. He just settles in next to me on the sofa and also watches the fire. He drinks his wine. I get ready to refill his glass, but he waves his hand, indicating it was enough.

I make a stupid comment: the temperature today fell below zero. He nods.

Apparently, I’ll have to take the initiative.

I really regret what happened at dinner last night …

“It wasn’t your fault. That woman is really weird. Please don’t invite me to any more things like that.”

His voice seems calm. But everyone learns as a child that before the worst storms, there’s always a moment when the wind stops and everything seems absolutely normal.

I push the matter. Marianne exhibited the jealousy hiding behind her modern, liberal mask.

“It’s true. Jealousy tells us: ‘You could lose everything you worked so hard to achieve.’ It blinds us to everything else, to the moments we’ve joyfully experienced, to happy times and the bonds created during those occasions. How is it that hatred can wipe out a couple’s entire history?”

He’s laying the groundwork for me to say everything I need to say. He continues:

“Everyone has days when they say: ‘Well, my life isn’t exactly lining up with my expectations.’ But if life asked you what you had done for it, what would you say?”

Is that a question for me?

“No. I’m questioning myself. Nothing happens without effort. You have to have faith. And for that, you have to break down the barriers of prejudice, which requires courage. To have courage, you must conquer your fears. And so on and so forth. Let’s make peace with our days. We can’t forget that life is on our side. It also wants to get better. Let’s help it out!”

I pour myself another glass of wine. He puts more wood on the fire. When will I have the courage to confess?

But he doesn’t seem to want to let me talk.

“Dreaming isn’t as simple as it seems. On the contrary, it can be quite dangerous. When we dream, we put powerful engines in motion and can no longer hide the true meaning of our life from ourselves. When we dream, we also make a choice of what price to pay.”

Now. The longer I take, the more suffering I’ll cause us both.

I raise my glass, make a toast, and say there is something troubling my soul. He replies that we already talked about this over dinner that night when I opened my heart and told him about my fear of being depressed. I explain that that’s not what I’m referring to. He interrupts me and continues his line of thought.

“Going after a dream has a price. It may mean abandoning our habits, it may make us go through hardships, or it may lead us to disappointment, et cetera. But however costly it may be, it is never as high as the price paid by people who didn’t live. Because one day they will look back and hear their own heart say: ‘I wasted my life.’ ”

He is not making things any easier. Let’s suppose what I have to say isn’t nonsense, that it is something tangible, genuine, threatening?

He laughs.

“I controlled the jealousy I feel because of you, and I’m happy with that. You know why? Because I always have to show I’m worthy of your love. I have to fight for our marriage, for our union, in ways that have nothing to do with our children. I love you. I would endure anything, absolutely anything, to always have you by my side. But I can’t stop you from leaving one day. So if that day comes, you are free to leave and seek your happiness. My love for you is stronger than anything, and I would never stop you from being happy.”

My eyes well up with tears. So far I’m not sure what he’s really saying. If this is just a conversation about jealousy or if he’s giving me a message.

“I’m not afraid of loneliness,” he continues. “I’m afraid of deluding myself, of looking at reality the way I would like it to be and not how it really is.”

He takes my hand.

“You are a blessing in my life. I may not be the best husband in the world, because I hardly ever show my feelings. And I know you need that. I also know that because of this, you might not think you’re important to me, you might feel insecure, or things like that. But it’s not like that. We should sit in front of the fire and talk about everything except for jealousy. Because I’m not interested in that. Perhaps it would be good to take a trip together, just the two of us? Spend New Year’s Eve in a different city or even a place we’ve already been?”

“But what about the children?”

“I’m sure their grandparents would be delighted to take care of them.”

And he concludes:

“When you love each other, you have to be ready for anything. Because love is like a kaleidoscope, the kind we used to play with when we were kids. It’s in constant movement and never repeats itself. If you don’t understand this, you are condemned to suffer for something that really only exists to make us happy. And you know the worst thing? People like that woman, always worried about what others think of their marriage. That doesn’t matter to me. The only thing that counts is what you think.”

I rest my head on his shoulder. Everything I had to say has lost its importance. He knows what is going on and is able to deal with the situation in a way I never could.





IT’S SIMPLE; as long doing anything illegal, making and losing money on the financial market is allowed.”


The former tycoon is trying to maintain his pose as one of the richest men in the world. But his fortune evaporated in less than a year after the big financiers discovered he was selling dreams. I try to show interest in what he’s saying. After all, I was the one who asked my boss to drop the series of articles about searching for solutions to stress for good.

It’s been one week since I received Jacob’s message saying I’d ruined everything. One week since I roamed the streets aimlessly, a moment I would soon be reminded of by the traffic ticket. One week since that conversation with my husband.

“We always have to know how to sell an idea. That is what constitutes success for any individual,” continues the former tycoon. “Knowing how to sell what they want.”

My dear fellow, despite all your pageantry, your aura of seriousness, and your suite in this luxury hotel; despite this magnificent view, your impeccably tailored suit from London, your smile, and your hair, dyed with utmost care so as to leave just a few white hairs to give the impression of “naturalness”; despite the confidence with which you speak, there is something I understand better than you: going around selling an idea isn’t everything. You have to find someone to buy. That goes for business, politics, and love.

I imagine, my dear former millionaire, that you understand what I’m talking about: you have charts, assistants, presentations … but what people want are results.

Love also wants results, although everyone insists, no, that the act of loving justifies itself. Is that how it is? I should be walking through the Jardin Anglais, in my fur coat my husband bought when he went to Russia, looking around at the autumn, smiling up at the sky and saying: “I love you, and that’s enough.” Could that be true?

Of course not. I love, but in return I want something concrete—holding hands, kisses, hot sex, a dream to share, the chance to create a new family and raise my children, the opportunity to grow old alongside the person I love.

“We need a very clear goal for any given step,” explains the pathetic figure in front of me with a seemingly confident smile.

I must be verging on madness again. I end up relating everything I hear or read to my emotional situation, even this boring interview with this annoying caricature. I think about it twenty-four hours a day—while I’m walking down the street, or cooking, or spending precious moments of my life listening to things that, rather than offer distraction, push me even deeper into the abyss where I’m plummeting.

“Optimism is contagious …”

The former tycoon cannot stop talking, certain that he will convert me and that I’ll publish this in the newspaper and his redemption will begin. It’s great to interview people like this. We need to ask only one question, and they talk for an hour. Unlike my conversation with the Cuban shaman, this time I’m not paying attention to a single word. The recorder is turned on, and later I’ll trim this monologue down to six hundred words, the equivalent of about four minutes of conversation.

Optimism is contagious, he states.

If that were the case, all you would have to do is go to the person you loved with a huge grin, full of plans and ideas, and know how to present the package. Does it work? No. What is really contagious is fear, the constant fear of never finding someone to accompany us to the end of our days. And in the name of this fear we are capable of doing anything, including accepting the wrong person and convincing ourselves that he or she’s the one, the only one, who God has placed in our path. In very little time the search for security turns into a heartfelt love, and things become less bitter and difficult. Our feelings can be put in a box and pushed to the back of the closet in our head, where it will remain forever, hidden and invisible.

“Some people say I’m one of the most well-connected men in my country. I know entrepreneurs, politicians, industrialists. What is happening with my companies is temporary. Soon you will witness my comeback.”

I’m also a well-connected person, I know the same types of people he knows. But I don’t want to prepare a comeback. I just want a civilized ending for one of these “connections.”

This is because things that don’t end clearly always leave a door open, an unexplored possibility, a chance that everything might still go back to being as it was before. I’m not used to this, but I know a lot of people who love being in this situation.

What am I doing? Comparing economics to love? Trying to establish a connection between the financial world and the emotional world? It’s been one week since I last heard from Jacob.

It’s also been one week since that night in front of the fireplace, when my relationship with my husband returned to normal. Will the two of us be able to rebuild our marriage?

Until this spring I was a normal person. One day I discovered that everything I had could disappear just like that, and instead of reacting like an intelligent person, I panicked. That led to inertia. Apathy. An inability to react and change. And after many sleepless nights, many days of finding no joy in life, I did exactly what I feared most: I walked the other way, despite the dangers. I know I’m not the only one—people have a tendency for self-destruction. By chance, or because life wanted to test me, I found someone who grabbed me by the hair—literally and figuratively—and rattled me, shaking off the dust that had been piling up and making me breathe again.

All of it completely false. It’s the type of happiness that addicts must find when they do drugs. Sooner or later the effects pass, and the despair becomes even greater.

The former tycoon starts talking about money. I didn’t ask anything about it, but he talks anyway. He has an enormous need to say he isn’t poor, that he can maintain his lifestyle for decades to come.

I can’t stand to be here any longer. I thank him for the interview, turn off the recorder, and go get my coat.

“Are you free this evening? We could get a drink and finish this conversation,” he suggests.

It’s not the first time this has happened. In fact, it’s almost a given with me. Even though Mme König won’t admit it, I am pretty and smart and I’ve used my charm to get certain people to say things they wouldn’t normally say to journalists, even after warning them I could publish everything. But the men … oh, the men! They do everything they can to hide their weaknesses and any eighteen-year-old girl can manipulate them without much effort.

I thank him for the invitation and say I already have plans for that evening. I’m tempted to ask how his latest girlfriend reacted to the wave of negative press and the collapse of his empire. But I can already imagine, and it’s of no interest to the newspaper.


I leave, cross the street, and go to the Jardin Anglais, where, moments ago, I imagined walking. I go to the old-fashioned ice-cream parlor on the corner of Rue du 31 Décembre. I like the name of this street because it always reminds me that sooner or later, another year will end and, once again, I’ll make big resolutions for the next.

I order a scoop of pistachio with chocolate. I walk to the pier and eat my ice cream while looking at the symbol of Geneva, its jet of water shooting up in the sky and creating a curtain of droplets before me. Tourists get closer and take photos that will come out poorly lit. Wouldn’t it be easier to just buy a postcard?

I have visited many monuments around the world, many of mighty men whose names are long forgotten, but who will remain eternally mounted on their beautiful horses. Of women holding their crowns or swords to the sky, symbolizing victories that no longer appear even in textbooks. Of lone, nameless children carved in stone, their innocence lost forever during the hours and days they were forced to pose for an artist whose name history has also stamped out.

With very few exceptions, in the end a city’s landmarks aren’t its statues, but unexpected things. When Eiffel built a steel tower for the World’s Fair, he never even dreamed it would wind up becoming the symbol of Paris—over the Louvre, the Arc de Triomphe, and its magnificent gardens. An apple represents New York. A not-so-crowded bridge is the symbol of San Francisco. Another bridge, this one over the Tagus, dominates the picture postcards of Lisbon. Barcelona has an unfinished cathedral as its most emblematic monument.

And so it is with Geneva. Lake Léman meets the Rhône River at precisely this point, creating a very strong current. A hydroelectric power station was built here to take advantage of the hydraulic power (we’re masters at taking advantage of things), but when the workers returned home and closed the valves, the pressure was too great and the turbines ended up bursting.

Until an engineer had the idea to put a fountain in place, allowing the excess water to run off.

Over time, engineers solved the problem and the fountain became unnecessary. But the city’s residents voted in a referendum to keep it. The city already had many fountains, and this one was in the middle of a lake. How could they make it more visible?

That was how the mutant monument was born. Powerful pumps were installed and now an extremely forceful jet shoots out five hundred liters of water per second, at two hundred kilometers per hour. They say, and I’ve confirmed it, that it can be seen from an airplane at thirty thousand feet. It doesn’t have a special name; it’s just called Jet d’Eau (jet of water), the city’s landmark in spite of all the sculptures of men on horses, heroic women, lonely children.

I once asked Denise, a Swiss scientist, what she thought of the Jet d’Eau.

“Our body is made almost entirely of water, through which electrical discharges pass, communicating information. One such piece of information is called love, and it can interfere with the entire organism. Love is always changing. I think that the Jet d’Eau is the most beautiful monument to love conceived by the art of man, because it is also never the same.”





I TAKE my phone and call Jacob’s office. Sure, I could dial his personal number, but no. I speak with his assistant and let her know I’m going to meet him.


His assistant knows me. She asks me to hold the line while she confirms. One minute later she returns and says she’s sorry, but his schedule is fully booked. Perhaps in the new year? I say no, I need to meet with him right away; it’s urgent.

“It’s urgent” doesn’t always open many doors, but in this case I’m sure my chances are good. This time the assistant takes two minutes. She asks if it could be early next week. I let her know I’ll be there in twenty minutes.

I say thank you and hang up.





JACOB asks me to get dressed quickly—after all, his office is a public place, paid for by government money. If someone were to find out, he could go to jail. I carefully study the walls covered with carved wood panels and beautiful frescoes on the ceiling. I’m still lying on the worn leather sofa, completely naked.


He is growing nervous. He’s in a suit and tie, looking anxiously at his watch. The lunch hour is over. His personal secretary is already back; she knocked quietly on the door, heard “I’m in a meeting,” and didn’t insist. Forty minutes have passed since then—along with a few hearings and appointments that have likely been canceled.

When I arrived, Jacob greeted me with three pecks on the cheek and pointed formally to the chair in front of his desk. I didn’t need my female intuition to figure out he was scared. What was the reason for this meeting? Don’t I understand he has a tight schedule? The parliamentary recess will start soon, and he needs to resolve several important issues. Did I not read the message he sent, saying how his wife is convinced there is something between us? We need to wait a while and let things cool off before we go back to meeting.

“Of course I denied everything. I pretended I was deeply shocked by her insinuations. I said my dignity had been offended. That I was sick of her distrust and that she could ask anyone about my behavior. Wasn’t she the one who said jealousy was a sign of inferiority? I did what I could, and she merely replied: ‘Stop being silly. I’m not complaining about anything, I’m just saying I found out why you’ve been so kind and polite lately.’ It was—”

I didn’t let him finish his sentence. I got up and grabbed him by the collar. He thought I was going to assault him. But instead I gave him a long kiss. Jacob was completely unresponsive, as he’d been imagining I had come there to do something melodramatic. But I continued kissing his mouth and neck as I undid his tie.

He pushed me away. I slapped him across the face.

“I just need to lock the door first. I’ve also missed you.”

He walked across his office, tastefully decorated with nineteenth-century furniture, and turned the key. When he returned I was already nearly naked, wearing just my panties.

As I ripped off his clothes, he started sucking on my breasts. I moaned with pleasure; he covered my mouth with his hand, but I shook my head and continued moaning quietly.

The whole time, I stopped only once to say: My reputation is at stake, as you can imagine. Don’t worry.

I got down on my knees and began to give him oral sex. Again, he held my head, setting the pace—faster and faster. But I didn’t want him to come in my mouth. I pushed him away and went to the leather sofa, where I leaned back with my legs spread. He kneeled and started to go down on me. When I had the first orgasm, I bit my hand to keep from screaming. The wave of pleasure felt like it would never end. I continued biting my hand.

Then I called his name, telling him I wanted him inside me and to do anything he wanted. He penetrated me, grabbed me by the shoulders, and shook me like a savage. He pushed my legs up so he could go deeper. The pace increased, but I ordered him not to come yet. I needed more and more and more.

He put me on the floor on all fours, like a dog, hit me, and penetrated me again as I wildly moved my waist. From his stifled groans, I knew that he was ready to come, that he could no longer control himself. I made him withdraw, turned over, and asked him to enter me again while looking into my eyes and saying the dirty things we loved to tell each other whenever we made love. I said the nastiest things a woman can say to a man. He called my name softly, begging me to tell him I loved him. But I just spoke profanities and demanded he treat me like a prostitute, like a stranger, that he use me like a slave, someone who didn’t deserve respect.

My entire body was covered in goose bumps. The pleasure came in waves. I came again and again as he controlled himself to prolong it as long as possible. Our bodies collided violently, creating rumblings that he must no longer care if anyone heard through the door.

My eyes locked on him, listening to him repeat my name with each movement; I realized he wasn’t wearing a condom and was going to come. Once again I shifted, making him withdraw. I asked him to come on my face, in my mouth, and tell me he loved me.

Jacob did exactly as I said, while I masturbated and came, too. Then he embraced me, put my head on his shoulder, and wiped the corners of my mouth with his hands. He said again, many times, that he loved me and that he had really missed me.

But now he’s asking me to get dressed, and I don’t budge. He’s gone back to being the well-behaved boy who the voters admire. He senses something is wrong, but doesn’t know what it is. He begins to realize that I’m not just there because he is an amazing lover.

“What do you want?”

Closure. As much as that breaks my heart and leaves me emotionally in shambles, I need to end it. To look in your eyes and say it’s over. Never again.

The suffering I endured this past week was almost unbearable. I cried tears I didn’t have and became lost in thoughts of being carried away to the campus where your wife works and committed to the university asylum. I thought I’d failed at everything, except at work and as a mother. I was one step away from life and death at every minute, dreaming about everything we could have had if we were still two teenagers looking into the future together, like the first time. But there came a moment when I understood that I had reached the limits of despair and couldn’t go any deeper, and when I looked up there was a single outstretched hand: my husband’s.

He must have known, too, but his love was stronger. I tried to be honest and tell him everything to lift that weight off my shoulders, but I didn’t need to. He made me see that regardless of the choices I made in life, he would always be by my side and so my burden was light.

I realized I was blaming myself and beating myself up over things he wasn’t condemning or even blaming me for. I told myself: “I’m not worthy of this man, he doesn’t know who I am.”

But he does know. And that’s what allows me to get back my self-respect and regain my self-esteem. Because if a man like him wants to stay by my side, a man who would have no difficulty at all finding a new partner the day after separating, it’s because I’m worth something; I’m worth a lot.

I discovered I could go back to sleeping by his side without feeling like I was dirty or think I was cheating on him. I felt loved and that I deserved this love.

I get up, gather my clothes, and go to his private bathroom. He knows it’s the last time he’ll see me naked.

There is a long healing process ahead, I say, when I return. I guess you are feeling the same thing, but I’m sure that all Marianne wants is for this fling to end so she can hug you again with the same love and the same security as before.

“Yes, but she won’t tell me anything. She knew what was going on and she closed herself off even more. She was never affectionate, and now she’s like a robot, more devoted to her work than ever. It’s her way of running away.”

I adjust my skirt, put on my shoes, take a bundle out of my bag, and leave it on his desk.

“What’s that?”

Cocaine.

“I didn’t know you …”

He doesn’t need to know anything, I think. He doesn’t need to know how far I was willing to go to fight for him, the man I was madly in love with. The passion is still there, but the flame weakens each day. I know it will eventually die out completely. Any breakup is painful, and I can feel this pain in every fiber of my body. It’s the last time I will see him alone. We will meet again at galas and cocktail parties, at elections and press conferences, but we will never again be the way we were today. It was great to have made love like that and end as we began, both of us completely surrendered to the other. I knew it was the last time; he didn’t, but I couldn’t say anything.

“What am I supposed to do with it?”

Throw it away. It cost me a small fortune, but throw it away. Then you’ll set me free from my addiction.

I don’t explain exactly what addiction I’m talking about. It has a name: Jacob König.

I see his expression of surprise and smile. I say good-bye with three kisses on the cheek and leave. In the vestibule, I turn to his aide and wave. He looks away, pretending to focus on a stack of papers, and just mumbles a good-bye.

When I make it to the sidewalk, I call my husband and tell him I would rather spend New Year’s Eve at home, with the children. If he wants to travel, let’s do it at Christmas.





LET’S take a walk before dinner?”


I nod yes, but I don’t move. I stare at the park across from the hotel and, beyond that, the Jungfrau, perpetually snowcapped and illuminated by the afternoon sun.

The human brain is fascinating; we will forget a scent until we smell it again, we will erase a voice from our memory until we hear it again, and even emotions that seemed buried forever will be awakened when we return to the same place.

I think back to when we were at Interlaken the first time. Back then we stayed at a cheap hotel and hiked from one lake to another, each time like we were discovering a new path. My husband was going to run that crazy marathon that has most of its route in the mountains. I was proud of his adventurous spirit, his desire to conquer the impossible and always demand more and more of his body.

He wasn’t the only person crazy enough to do it; people came from all over the world, filling the hotels and socializing in the many bars and restaurants of this small town of five thousand inhabitants. I have no idea how Interlaken is in the winter, but from my window it now seems more empty, more removed.

This time we’re staying in a better hotel. We have a beautiful suite. The manager’s card is on the table, greeting us and offering us the bottle of champagne that we’ve already emptied.

He calls my name. I come back to reality and we go downstairs to take a walk through the streets before nightfall.

If he asks me whether or not everything is fine, I’ll lie, because I don’t want to spoil his happiness. But the truth is that the wounds in my heart are taking a long time to heal. He points out the bench where we sat to have coffee one morning and were approached by a couple of neo-hippie foreigners asking for money. We pass in front of one of the churches as the bells ring, he kisses me and I kiss him back, doing all I can to hide what I feel.

We walk holding hands because of the cold—I hate wearing gloves. We stop at a nice bar and drink a little. We go to the train station. He buys the same souvenir he bought last time—a lighter with the symbol of the city. Back then he smoked and ran marathons.

Today he doesn’t smoke and he thinks he gets more and more out of breath each day. He is always panting when we walk quickly and, though he tries to hide it, I’ve noticed he was more tired than usual when we took that run by the lake in Nyon.

My phone is vibrating. It takes me ages to find it in my purse. When I finally find it, the person has already hung up. The screen shows it was my friend, the one who was depressed and, thanks to medication, is a happy person again today.

“If you want to call her back, I don’t mind.”

I ask why I should call back. Is he unhappy with my company? Does he want to be interrupted by people who will spend hours on the phone engaged in irrelevant chatter?

He gets irritated with me, too. Maybe it’s just the effect of the bottle of champagne, coupled with the two glasses of aquavit. His irritation calms me and puts me more at ease; I am walking alongside a human being, with emotions and feelings.

Interlaken sure is strange without the marathon, I say. It looks like a ghost town.

“There are no ski slopes here.”

Nor could there be. We are in the middle of a valley, with very high mountains to either side and lakes at each end.

He orders two glasses of gin. I suggest we change bars, but he is determined to combat the cold with alcohol. We haven’t done this in a long time.

“I know it’s only been ten years, but when we were here the first time, I was young. I had ambitions, I liked the open air, and I wouldn’t let myself be intimidated by the unknown. Have I changed that much?”

You’re only in your thirties. Are you really an old man?

He doesn’t answer. He downs his drink in one gulp and stares into space. He is no longer the perfect husband and, oddly enough, this makes me happy.

We leave the bar and walk back to the hotel. Along the way we find a beautiful and charming restaurant, but we’ve already made reservations elsewhere. It’s still early—the sign says dinner service doesn’t start until seven p.m.

“Let’s have another gin.”

Who is this man next to me? Has Interlaken awakened forgotten memories and opened up Pandora’s box?

I say nothing. And I begin to be afraid.

I ask if we should cancel our reservation at the Italian restaurant and have dinner here instead.

“It doesn’t matter.”

It doesn’t matter? Is he suddenly feeling everything I went through when he thought I was depressed?

For me it does matter. I want to go to the restaurant we booked. The same one where we exchanged vows of love.

“This trip was a terrible idea. I’d rather go back tomorrow. I had good intentions: I wanted to relive the early days of our relationship. But is that even possible? Of course not. We’re mature. We’re living under pressures that didn’t exist before. We need to maintain basic needs like education, healthcare, food. We try to have fun on the weekends because that’s what everybody does, and when we don’t feel like leaving the house, we think there’s something wrong with us.”

I never want to. I’d rather do nothing.

“Me, too. But what about our children? They want something else. We can’t leave them locked up with their computers. They’re too young for that. So we force ourselves to take them somewhere and do the same things our parents did with us, the same thing our grandparents did with our parents. An ordinary life. We’re an emotionally well-structured family. If one of us needs help, the other is always ready to do anything.”

I understand. Like taking a trip to a place filled with memories, for example.

Another glass of gin. He sits in silence for a while before replying.

“That’s right. But do you think memories can fill the present? Not at all. In fact, they’re suffocating me. I’m discovering I’m no longer the same person. Until we got here and had that bottle of champagne, everything was fine. Now I realize just how far I am from living the life I dreamed of when I visited Interlaken the first time.”

What did you dream?

“It was silly. But it was still my dream. And I could have made it come true.”

But what was it?

“Sell everything I had, buy a boat, and travel the world with you. My father would have been furious that I didn’t follow in his footsteps, but it wouldn’t have mattered. We’d stop off at ports, do odd jobs until we earned enough to move on, and as soon as we had enough money, we’d set sail again. Be with people we’d never seen before and discover places not listed in the guidebooks. Adventure. My only wish was adventure.”

He orders another glass of gin and drinks it at unprecedented speed. I stop drinking because I’m already feeling nauseated; we haven’t had anything to eat. I’d like to say that I would have been the happiest woman in the world if he’d gotten his wish. But I had better keep quiet or he’ll feel worse.

“Then came the first child.”

So? There must be millions of couples with children doing exactly what he suggested.

He reflects a bit.

“I wouldn’t say millions. Maybe thousands.”

His eyes change; they no longer show aggression, but sadness.

“There are times when we should stop to take a look at the whole picture: our past and our present. What we have learned and the mistakes we made. I was always afraid of those moments. I trick myself, telling myself that I made the best choices and had to make a few small sacrifices. Nothing major.”

I suggest we walk a bit. His eyes are starting to get weird, dull.

He slams his fist on the table. The waitress looks frightened, and I order another glass of gin for me. She refuses. It’s time to close the bar because dinner will begin soon. And she brings the bill.

I wonder how my husband will react. But he just gets out his wallet and throws some money on the counter. He takes my hand and we go out in the cold.

“I’m afraid that if I think too much about everything that could have been, and never was, I’ll fall into a dark hole …”

I know that feeling. We talked about this at the restaurant, when I opened up to you.

He doesn’t seem to hear.

“… deep down there’s a voice telling me: none of this makes sense. The universe has existed for billions of years, and it will continue to exist after you die. We live in a microscopic part of a gigantic mystery, and we still have no answers to our childhood questions: Is there life on another planet? If God is good, why does He allow suffering and the pain of others? And what’s worse: time continues to pass. Often, for no apparent reason, I feel an immense dread. Sometimes it’s when I’m at work, sometimes in the car, and sometimes when I put the kids to bed. I look at them lovingly, afraid: What will happen to them? They live in a country that gives us peace and security, but what about the future?”

Yes, I understand what you’re saying. I imagine we’re not the only ones to think that way.

“Then I see you making breakfast or dinner and occasionally I think that fifty years from now, or maybe even less, one of us will be sleeping alone, crying every night because once we were happy. The children will be all grown up and far away. The surviving one of us will be sick, always needing help from strangers.”

He stops talking, and we walk in silence. We pass by a sign announcing a New Year’s Eve party. He kicks it violently. Two or three passersby look at us.

“Forgive me. I didn’t mean to say all that. I brought you here to make you feel better without all the daily pressures. Blame it on the booze.”

I’m stunned.

We pass by a group of young men and women who are talking animatedly among the beer cans scattered everywhere. My husband, usually shy and serious, approaches them and invites them to have another drink.

The young people look frightened. I apologize, hinting that we’re both drunk and one drop more of alcohol might lead to catastrophe. I grab his arm and we carry on.

How long has it been since I’ve done that? He was always the protector, the helper, the problem solver. Now I’m the one trying to keep him from skidding and falling. His mood has changed again, and now he’s singing a song I’ve never heard—perhaps a traditional song of that region.

When we approach the church, the bells ring again.

That’s a good sign, I say.

“I listen to the bells. They speak of God. But is God listening to us? We’re in our thirties, and life isn’t fun anymore. If not for our children, what would be the point of all this?”

I prepare myself to say something. But I have no answer. We arrive at the restaurant where we exchanged our first words of love and have a depressing candlelight dinner in one of the most beautiful and most expensive cities in Switzerland.





WHEN I awake, there’s already daylight outside. I had a dreamless sleep and didn’t wake up in the middle of the night. I look at the clock: nine a.m.


My husband is still sleeping. I go to the bathroom, brush my teeth, and order breakfast for the two of us. I put on a robe and go to the window to pass the time while I wait for the room service to arrive.

At this point, I notice something: the sky is full of paragliders! They land in the park opposite the hotel. Most are not alone, and have an instructor behind them steering. First-timers.

How can they do such a crazy thing? Have we reached the point where risking our life is the only thing that frees us from boredom?

Another paraglider lands. And another. Friends film everything, smiling cheerfully. I wonder what the view must be like up there, because the mountains surrounding us are very, very high.

Although I envy every one of those people, I would never have the courage to jump.

The doorbell rings. The waiter enters with a silver tray, a vase with a rose, coffee (for my husband), tea (for me), croissants, hot toast, rye bread, jams of various flavors, eggs, orange juice, the local newspaper, and everything else that makes us happy.

I wake him up with a kiss. I don’t remember the last time I did that. He is startled, but then smiles. We sit at the table and savor the treats in front of us. We talk a bit about our drinking spree last night.

“I think I needed that. But don’t take what I said too seriously. When a balloon bursts, it startles everyone, but it’s nothing more than that: a bursting balloon. Harmless.”

I want to say it felt great to discover all his weaknesses, but I just smile and keep eating my croissant.

He also notices the paragliders. His eyes light up. We get dressed and go downstairs to enjoy the morning.

We go straight to the front desk. He says we’ll be leaving today, asks them to bring down our suitcases, and pays the bill.

Are you sure? Can’t we stay until tomorrow morning?

“I’m sure. Last night was enough for me to understand that it’s impossible to go back in time.”

We head to the door crossing the long, glass-ceilinged lobby. I read in one of the brochures that there used to be a street here; now they’ve joined the two buildings that stood on either side. Tourism is apparently thriving, even without ski slopes.

But instead of going out the door, my husband turns left and approaches the concierge.

“How can we go paragliding?”

We? I don’t have the slightest intention of doing that.

The concierge hands him a brochure. It’s all there.

“And how do we get up top?”

The concierge explains that we don’t have to go all the way up. The road is very treacherous. All we have to do is set a time and they’ll pick us up from the hotel.

Isn’t it very dangerous? Jumping into the nothing between two mountain ranges without ever having done it before? Who is in charge? Are there any government controls on the instructors and their equipment?

“Madam, I’ve been working here for ten years. I paraglide at least once a year. I’ve never seen a single accident.”

He is smiling. He must have repeated those words thousands of times over those ten years.

“Shall we?”

What? Why don’t you go alone?

“Sure, I can go by myself. You can wait for me down here with the camera. But I need and want to have this experience in life. It’s always terrified me. Just yesterday we talked about when everything gets stuck in a rut and how we no longer test our limits. It was a very sad night for me.”

I know. He asks the concierge to set a time.

“Now, this morning, or in the afternoon, when you can see the sunset reflected on the surrounding snow?”

Now, I reply.

“So, will it be one person or two?”

Two, if we do it now. If I don’t have a chance to think about what I’m doing. If I don’t have time to open the box and let the demons out—fear of heights, of the unknown, of death, of life, of extreme feelings. Now or never.

“We have the option of twenty-minute, half-hour, and one-hour flights.”

Are there ten-minute flights?

No.

“Would you like to jump from one thousand three hundred and fifty or one thousand eight hundred meters?”

I’m already starting to back down. I didn’t need all this information. Of course I want the lowest possible jump.

“Darling, that makes no sense. I’m sure nothing will happen, but if it did, the danger is the same. Falling from twenty-one meters, or the equivalent of the seventh floor of a building, would have just the same consequences.”

The concierge laughs. I laugh to hide my feelings. How could I have been so naïve to think that a measly five hundred meters would make any difference?

The concierge picks up the phone and talks to someone.

“There is only space available for jumps at one thousand three hundred and fifty meters.”

More absurd than my earlier fear is the relief I feel now. Oh, good!

The car will be at the hotel doorstep in ten minutes.





I STAND before the chasm with my husband and five or six other people, waiting for my turn. On the way up I thought about my children and the possibility of losing their parents … Then I realized we wouldn’t be jumping together.


We put on special thermal outfits and helmets. Why the helmet? So my skull will still be intact if I hit a rock and skip three thousand feet to the ground?

The helmet is mandatory.

Perfect. I put on the helmet—just like the ones worn by cyclists on the streets of Geneva. Completely stupid, but I won’t argue.

I look ahead; between us and the chasm is a snow-covered slope. I can stop the flight in the first second by landing there and walking back up. I don’t have to go all the way to the end.

I’ve never been afraid of flying. It’s always been a part of my life. But the thing is, when we’re in a plane, it doesn’t occur to us that it’s exactly the same as going paragliding. The only difference is that the metal cocoon feels like a shield and gives us the feeling that we’re protected. That’s it.

That’s it? In my meager understanding of the laws of aerodynamics, I suppose so.

I need to convince myself. I need a better argument.

This is a better argument; the airplane is made of metal. It’s extremely heavy. And it carries luggage, people, equipment, and tons of explosive fuel. The paraglider, in turn, is light, descends with the wind, and obeys the laws of nature like a leaf falling from a tree. It makes much more sense.

“Do you want to go first?”

Yes, I do. Because if something happens to me, you’ll know and can take care of our children. And you’ll feel guilty for the rest of your life for having this insane idea. I will be remembered as a companion for all seasons, one who always stood by her husband’s side, in sorrow and in joy, adventure and routine.

“We’re ready, madam.”

Are you the instructor? Aren’t you too young for this? I’d rather go with your boss. It’s my first time, after all.

“I’ve been jumping since I reached the age minimum of sixteen. I’ve been jumping for five years, not just here, but many different places around the world. Don’t worry, madam.”

His condescending tone annoys me. Old people and their fears should be respected. Besides, he must tell everybody that.

“Remember the instructions. And when we start to run, don’t stop. Let me take care of the rest.”

Instructions. As if we were now familiar with all of this, when the most they had the patience to explain was that the risk lies exactly in wanting to stop in the middle. And that, when we reach the ground, we should keep walking until we feel our feet firmly fixed.

My dream: feet on the ground. I go to my husband and ask him to go last, then he’ll have time to see what happens to me.

“Want to bring the camera?” asks the instructor.

The camera can be attached to an aluminum rod approximately two feet long. No, I do not. For starters, I’m not doing this to show other people. And even if I can overcome my panic, I’d be more worried about filming than admiring the scenery. I learned that with my dad when I was a teenager: we hiked the Matterhorn and I stopped every minute to take pictures until he fumed: “Do you think all this beauty and grandeur can fit in a little square of film? Record things in your heart. It’s more important than trying to show people what you’re experiencing.”

My flight partner, in all his wisdom of twenty-one years, begins attaching ropes to my body with big aluminum clips. The chair is attached to the glider; I will go in front, he in the back. I can still give up, but that’s no longer me. I am completely unresponsive.

The twenty-one-year-old veteran and the ringleader trade opinions about the wind as we get into position.

He also fastens himself to the chair. I can feel his breath on the back of my head. I look behind me and I don’t like what I see: a row of colored pieces of fabric stretches across the white snowy ground, each with a person tied to it. At the end of the row is my husband, also wearing a bicycle helmet. I guess he had no choice and will jump two or three minutes after me.

“We’re ready. Start running.”

I don’t move.

“Let’s go. Start running.”

I explain that I don’t want to keep twirling around in the sky. Let’s go down gently. Five minutes of flight is good for me.

“You can let me know while we’re flying. But, please, there’s a line. We have to jump now.”

As I no longer have free will, I follow orders. I start running toward the void.

“Faster.”

I go faster, my boots kicking snow in all directions. Actually, it’s not me who is running, but a robot who obeys voice commands. I start to scream—not from fear or excitement, but from instinct. I’ve gone back to being a cave woman, like the Cuban shaman said. We’re afraid of spiders and insects, and we scream in situations like this. We’ve always screamed.

Suddenly my feet lift off the ground, and I hold on to the belts securing me to the chair with all my might. I stop screaming. The instructor keeps running for a few more seconds and then immediately we’re no longer going in a straight line. The wind is controlling our lives.





I don’t open my eyes that first minute—I don’t want a concept of height, the mountains, the danger. I try to imagine that I’m at home in the kitchen, telling the kids a story about something that happened during our trip; maybe about the town, or maybe about the hotel room. I can’t tell them their father drank so much he fell down when we were headed back to the hotel. I can’t say I took a risk and went flying, because they’ll want to do it, too. Or, worse, they might try to fly alone and throw themselves from the top floor of our house.

Then I realize I’m being stupid; why be here with my eyes closed? No one made me jump. “I’ve been here for ten years and have never seen a single accident,” said the concierge.

I open my eyes.

And what I see, what I feel, is something I will never be able to accurately describe. Down below is the valley linking the two lakes, and the town between them. I’m flying, free in space and silence as we follow the wind, sailing in circles. The mountains surrounding us no longer seem so high or threatening, but friendly, dressed in white, with the sun glistening all around.

My hands relax, I let go of the straps, and I open my arms like a bird. The man behind me must have realized that I’m a different person. Instead of continuing down, he starts to rise, using invisible currents of warm air in what once seemed like a homogeneous atmosphere.

Ahead of us is an eagle, sailing the same ocean and effortlessly using its wings to control its mysterious flight. Where does it want to go? Is it just having fun, enjoying life and the beauty all around it?

It feels like I’m communicating with the eagle by telepathy. The flight instructor follows it, our guide. Show us where we need to go to climb increasingly skyward—to fly forever. I feel the same thing I felt that day in Nyon when I imagined running until my body couldn’t run anymore.

And the eagle tells me: “Come. You are heaven and earth, the wind and the clouds, the snow and the lakes.”

It seems like I am in my mother’s womb, completely safe and protected and experiencing things for the first time. Soon I will be born, and I will turn back into a human being who walks with two feet on the face of the Earth. At the moment, though, all I am doing is existing in this womb, putting up no resistance and letting myself go wherever I’m taken.

I’m free.

Yes, I’m free. And the eagle is right: I am the mountains and the lakes. I have no past, present, or future. I am getting to know what people call “Eternity.”

For a split second I wonder: Does everyone who jumps have this same feeling? But what does that matter? I don’t want to think about others. I’m floating in Eternity. Nature speaks to me as if I were its beloved daughter. The mountain tells me: “You have my strength.” The lakes tell me: “You have my peace and my calm.” The sun tells me: “Shine like me, go beyond yourself. Listen.”

I start to hear the voices that have been stifled inside for so long, stifled by haunting thoughts, by loneliness, by night terrors, the fear of change, and the fear that everything will stay the same. The higher we go, the further I distance myself from me.

I’m in another world where things fall perfectly into place. Far from that life full of chores to do, impossible desires, suffering, and pleasure. I have nothing and I am everything.

The eagle begins to turn toward the valley. With open arms I mimic the movement of its wings. If anyone could see me right now, they wouldn’t know who I am, because I am light, space, and time. I’m in another world.

And the eagle tells me: “This is Eternity.”

In Eternity, we don’t exist; we are just an instrument of the Hand that created the mountains, the snow, the lakes, and the sun. I go back in time and space to the moment when everything is created and the stars walk backward. I want to serve this Hand.

Several ideas appear and disappear without changing the way I feel. My mind has left my body and blended with nature. Oh, what a pity the eagle and I must land at the park across from the hotel down below. But what does it matter what will happen in the future? I am here, in this womb made of nothing and everything.

My heart fills every corner of the universe. I try to explain this to myself in words, try to find a way to remember what I feel right now, but soon these thoughts disappear and emptiness returns to fill everything once again.

My heart!

Before I saw a gigantic universe around me; and now the universe seems like a little dot within my heart that has infinitely expanded, like space. An instrument. A blessing. My mind struggles to maintain control and explain at least something that I’m feeling, but the power is stronger.

Power. The feeling of Eternity gives me a mysterious feeling of power. I can do anything, even end world suffering. I am flying and talking with the angels, hearing voices and revelations that will soon be forgotten, but that, at this moment, are as real as the eagle before me. I will never be capable of explaining what I feel, not even to myself, but what does it matter? It’s the future, and I’m not there yet. I’m in the present.

The rational mind disappears again and I am grateful. I bow to my gigantic heart filled with light and power, which can encompass everything that has already happened and what will happen from now until the end of time.

For the first time I hear something: dogs barking. We are nearing the ground and reality begins to return. In a moment I will be stepping on the planet where I live, but in my heart I have experienced all the planets and all the suns, which was greater than anything.

I want to stay in this state, but my thoughts are returning. I see our hotel to the right. The lakes are already hidden by the forests and small hills.

My God, can’t I stay this way forever?

“You cannot,” says the eagle, who led us to the park where we will land shortly, and who now bids us farewell because it has found a new stream of warm air. It climbs up again effortlessly, without battings its wings, and controls the wind with its feathers. “If you stayed this way forever, you couldn’t live in this world,” it says.

So what? I begin to argue with the eagle, but I find that I am doing it rationally, trying to reason. How will I live in this world after having gone through what I did in Eternity?

“Find a way,” replies the eagle, almost inaudibly. Then it departs—forever—from my life.

The instructor whispers something—he reminds me that I have to run when my feet hit the ground.

I see the grass in front of me. The thing I had so yearned for before—reaching solid ground—has now turned into the end of something.

Of what, exactly?

My feet hit the ground. I run a little, and the instructor controls the paraglider. Then he comes up to me and loosens the chains. He looks at me. I gaze at the sky. All I can see are other colorful paragliders, approaching where I am.

I realize that I am crying.

“Are you all right?”

I nod yes. I don’t know if he understands what I experienced up there.

Yes, he understands. He says that once a year he flies with someone who has the same reaction as me.

“When I ask what it is, they aren’t able to explain it. The same thing happens to my friends; some people go into a state of shock and they only recover when their feet touch the ground.”

It’s exactly the opposite. But I don’t feel like explaining anything.

I thank him for his comforting words. I would like to explain that I never wanted what I experienced up there to end. But it’s over, and I have no obligation to sit here explaining anything to anyone. I walk away to sit on one of the park benches and wait for my husband.

I can’t stop crying. He lands, approaches me with a big grin, and says it was a fantastic experience. I keep crying. He hugs me, says it’s all over now, and that he shouldn’t have made me do something I didn’t want to.

It’s not that at all, I say. Just leave me alone, please. I’ll be fine in a little while.

Someone from the support team comes to collect our outfits and special shoes and hands us our coats. I do everything automatically, but my every move brings me back to a different world, the one we call the “real” world, the one where I don’t want to be at all.

But I have no choice. The only thing I can do is ask my husband to leave me alone for a while. He asks if we should go back to the hotel because it’s cold. No, I’m fine right here.

I sit there for half an hour, crying. Tears of bliss that wash my soul. Finally, I realize that it is time to return to the world for good.

I get up. We go to the hotel, get our car, and my husband drives back to Geneva. The radio is on so no one feels compelled to talk. I gradually begin to get a terrible headache, but I know what it is: my blood returning to parts that were blocked by emotions that are finally beginning to dissolve. The moment of release is accompanied by pain, but it’s always been that way.

He doesn’t need to explain what he said yesterday. I don’t need to explain what I felt today.

The world is perfect.





IN JUST one hour the year will come to an end. The city decided on significant spending cuts for Geneva’s traditional New Year’s Eve celebrations, so we will have fewer fireworks. It’s just as well; I’ve seen fireworks my whole life and they no longer give me the same thrill as they did when I was a child.


I cannot say I am going to miss these past 365 days. The wind blew, lightning struck, and the sea nearly capsized my boat, but in the end I managed to cross the ocean and reach dry land.

Dry land? No relationship should go off in search of that. What kills a relationship between two people is precisely the lack of challenge, the feeling that nothing is new anymore. We need to continue to be a surprise for each other.

It all begins with a big party. Friends come out, the celebrant says things he’s repeated at hundreds of weddings, like that idea of building a house on rock, and not on sand. The guests throw rice; we throw the bouquet. The single women secretly envy us, and the married women know we are starting on a path that is not at all like what we’ve read about in fairy tales.

And then reality gradually begins to set in, but we don’t accept it. We want our partner to remain the person we met at the altar and with whom we exchanged rings. As if we could stop time.

We cannot. We should not. Wisdom and experience don’t change the man. Time doesn’t change the man. The only thing that changes us is love. While I was in the air, I understood that my love for life, for the universe, was more powerful than anything.





I REMEMBER a sermon written by a young unknown nineteenth-century pastor analyzing the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians and the various sides that Love reveals as it grows. He tells us that many of the spiritual texts we see today are addressed to only one part of man.


They offer Peace, but do not speak of Life.

They discuss Faith, but forget Love.

They tell us about Justice, and do not mention Revelation, like the one I had when I jumped from the precipice in Interlaken and the one that got me out of the black hole I had dug in my soul.

May it always be clear that only True Love can compete with any other Love in this world. When we give everything, we have nothing more to lose. And then fear, jealousy, boredom, and monotony disappear, and all that remains is the light from a void that does not frighten us, but brings us closer to one another. The light that always changes, and that is what makes it beautiful and full of surprises—not always those we hope for, but those we can live with.

To love abundantly is to live abundantly.

To love forever is to live forever. Eternal life is coupled with Love.

Why do we want to live forever? Because we want to live another day with this person by our side. Because we want to keep going with someone who deserves our Love, and who knows how to love us as we think we deserve to be loved.

Because living is loving.

Even Love for a pet—a dog, for example—can justify the life of a human being. If he no longer has this bond of Love in his life, any reason to keep on living also disappears.

Let us first seek Love, and everything else will be added.

During these ten years of marriage, I have enjoyed almost every pleasure a woman can have, and had to bear things I did not deserve. Yet when I look back, there were only a few moments—usually very short—when I was able to find even a poor imitation of what I imagine True Love to be: the birth of my children, when I sat holding hands with my husband and looking at the Alps, or the enormous jet of water in Lake Geneva. But these few moments are what justify my existence, because they give me the strength to keep going and bring joy to my days—no matter how much I tried to bring them sorrow.

I go to the window and look at the city outside. The snow they had promised did not fall. Still, I think this is one of the most romantic New Year’s Eves I have ever had, because I was dying and Love revived me. Love, the only thing that will remain when the human race has died out.

Love. My eyes well up with tears of joy. No one can force himself to love, nor can he force another person. All you can do is look at Love, fall in love with Love, and imitate it.

There is no other way to achieve love and there is no mystery about it. We love others, we love ourselves, we love our enemies, and then we will never want for anything in our lives. I can turn on the television and see what is happening around the world because, as long as a bit of Love exists in these tragedies, we are heading for salvation. Because Love begets more Love.

Those who know how to love, love Truth, rejoice with the Truth, and do not fear it, because sooner or later it redeems everything. They seek the Truth with a clear, humble mind lacking prejudice or intolerance—and are ultimately satisfied with what they find.

Perhaps the word “sincerity” isn’t the best way to explain this characteristic of Love, but I can’t find any other. I’m not talking about the sincerity that demeans those close to you; True Love does not consist of exposing your weaknesses to others, but instead of being unafraid to show when you need help and rejoicing in finding that things are better than what others said.

I think fondly of Jacob and Marianne. Unwittingly, they brought me back to my husband and my family. I hope they are happy on this last night of the year, and that all this also brought them closer together.

Am I trying to justify my adultery? No. I sought Truth and I found it. I hope it’s like that for everyone who has had this experience.

Learn to love better.

This should be our goal in the world: learn to love.

Life offers us thousands of opportunities for learning. Every man and every woman, in every day of our lives, always has a good opportunity to surrender to Love. Life is not a long vacation, but a constant learning process.

And the most important lesson is learning to love.

Loving better and better. Because the languages, the countries, the solid Swiss Confederation, Geneva and the street where I live with its lampposts, our house, the living-room furniture, it will all disappear … and my body will disappear, too.

But one thing will be forever marked on the soul of the universe: my Love. All in spite of my mistakes, my decisions that caused others to suffer, and the moments when I thought it didn’t exist.





I LEAVE the window and call out to my children and husband. I say that—according to tradition—we have to climb up on the sofa in front of the fireplace and, exactly at midnight, step on the floor with our right foot.


“Darling, it’s snowing!”

I rush to the window again and look at the light of one of the streetlamps. Yes, it’s snowing! How had I not noticed before?

“Can we go outside?” asks one of the children.

Not yet. First we will climb on the sofa, eat twelve grapes, and save the seeds to have prosperity all year long. We will do everything we learned from our ancestors.

Then we will go outside to celebrate life. I am sure that the new year will be excellent.

Geneva, November 30, 2013

On 11 November 1997, Veronika decided that the moment to kill herself had—at last!—arrived. She carefully cleaned the room that she rented in a convent, turned off the heating, brushed her teeth and lay down.





She picked up the four packs of sleeping pills from her bedside table. Instead of crushing them and mixing them with water, she decided to take them one by one, because there is always a gap between intention and action, and she wanted to feel free to turn back half way. However, with each pill she swallowed, she felt more convinced: after five minutes the packs were empty.



Since she didn’t know exactly how long it would take her to lose consciousness, she had placed on the bed that month’s issue of a French magazine,Homme , which had just arrived in the library where she

worked. She had no particular interest in computer science, but, as she leafed through the magazine, she came across an article about a computer game (one of those CD-Roms), created by Paulo Coelho, a Brazilian writer she had happened to meet at a lecture in the caf? at the Grand Union Hotel. They had exchanged a few words and she had ended up being invited by his publisher to join them for supper.

There were a lot of people there, though, and they hadn’t had a chance to talk in depth about anything.



The fact that she had met the author, however, led her to think that he was part of her world, and that reading an article about his work could help pass the time. While she was waiting for death, Veronika

started reading about computer science, a subject in which she was not in the least bit interested, but then that was in keeping with what she had done all her life, always looking for the easy option, for whatever

was nearest to hand. Like that magazine, for example.



To her surprise, though, the first line of text shook her out of her natural passivity (the tranquillizers had

not yet dissolved in her stomach, but Veronika was, by nature, passive), and, for the first time in her life,

it made her ponder the truth of a saying that was very fashionable amongst her friends: ‘nothing in this





world happens by chance’.



Why that first line, at precisely the moment when she had begun to die? What was the hidden message she saw before her, assuming there are such things as hidden messages rather than mere coincidences.



Underneath an illustration of the computer game, the journalist began his article by asking: ‘Where is

Slovenia?’





‘Honestly,’she thought, ‘no one ever knows where Slovenia is.’



But Slovenia existed nonetheless, and it was outside, inside, in the mountains around her and in the square she was looking out at: Slovenia was her country.



She put the magazine to one side, there was no point now in getting indignant with a world that knew absolutely nothing about the Slovenes; her nation’s honour no longer concerned her. It was time to feel proud of herself, to recognise that she had been able to do this, that she had finally had the courage and was leaving this life: what joy! Also she was doing it as she had always dreamed she would—by taking sleeping pills, which leave no mark.



Veronika had been trying to get hold of the pills for nearly six months. Thinking that she would never manage it, she had even considered slashing her wrists. It didn’t matter that the room would end up awash with blood, and the nuns would be left feeling confused and troubled, for suicide demands that people think of themselves first and of others later. She was prepared to do all she could so that her

death would cause as little upset as possible, but if slashing her wrists was the only way, then she had no option—and the nuns could clean up the room and quickly forget the whole story, otherwise they would find it hard to rent out the room again. We may live at the end of the twentieth century, but people still believe in ghosts.



Obviously she could have thrown herself off one of the few tall buildings in Ljubljana, but what about the further suffering caused to her parents by a fall from such a height? Apart from the shock of learning that their daughter had died, they would also have to identify a disfigured corpse; no, that was a worse

solution than bleeding to death, because it would leave indelible marks on two people who only wanted the best for her.



‘They would get used to their daughter’s death eventually. But it must be impossible to forget a shattered skull.’



Shooting, jumping off a high building, hanging, none of these options suited her feminine nature. Women, when they kill themselves, choose far more romantic methods—like slashing their wrists or taking an overdose of sleeping pills. Abandoned princesses and Hollywood actresses have provided numerous examples of this.



Veronika knew that life was always a matter of waiting for the right moment to act. And so it proved. In response to her complaints that she could no longer sleep at night, two friends of hers managed to get

hold of two packs each of a powerful drug, used by musicians at a local nightclub. Veronika left the four packs on her bedside table for a week, courting approaching death and saying goodbye—entirely unsentimentally—to what people called Life.





Now she was there, glad she had gone all the way, and bored because she didn’t know what to do with the little time that remained to her.



She thought again about the absurd question she had just read. How could an article about computers begin with such an idiotic opening line: ‘Where is Slovenia?’



Having nothing more interesting to do, she decided to read the whole article and she learned that the said computer game had been made in Slovenia—that strange country that no one seemed quite able to place, except the people who lived there—because it was a cheap source of labour. A few months before,

when the product was launched, the French manufacturer had given a party for journalists from all over the world in a castle in Vled.



Veronika remembered reading something about the party, which had been quite an event in the city, not just because the castle had been redecorated in order to match as closely as possible the medieval

atmosphere of the CD-Rom, but because of the controversy in the local press: journalists from Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Spain had been invited, but not a single Slovene.



Homme’s correspondent—who was visiting Slovenia for the first time, doubtless with all expenses paid, and determined to spend his visit chatting up other journalists, making supposedly interesting comments

and enjoying the free food and drink at the castle—had decided to begin his article with a joke which must have appealed to the sophisticated intellectuals of his country. He had probably told his fellow

journalists on the magazine various untrue stories about local customs too, and said how badly Slovene women dress.



That washis problem. Veronika was dying, and she had other concerns, such as wondering if there was life after death, or when her body would be found. Nevertheless—or perhaps precisely because of the important decision she had taken—the article bothered her.





She looked out of the convent window that gave on to the small square in Ljubljana. ‘If they don’t know where Slovenia is, then Ljubljana must be a myth,’ she thought. Like Atlantis or Lemuria, or the other lost continents that fill men’s imaginations. No one, anywhere in the world, would begin an article asking

where Mount Everest was, even if they had never been there. Yet, in the middle of Europe, a journalist

on an important magazine felt no shame at asking such a question, because he knew that most of his readers would not know where Slovenia was, still less its capital, Ljubljana.



It was then that Veronika found a way of passing the time, now that ten minutes had gone by and she

had still not noticed any bodily changes. The final act of her life would be to write a letter to the magazine, explaining that Slovenia was one of the five republics into which the former Yugoslavia had been divided.

The letter would be her suicide note. She would give no explanation of the real reasons for her death. When they found her body, they would conclude that she had killed herself because a magazine did not

know where her country was. She laughed to think of the controversy in the newspapers, with some for

and some against her suicide committed in honour of her country’s cause. And she was shocked by how quickly she could change her mind, since only moments before she had thought exactly the opposite, that

the world and other geographical problems were no longer her concern.





She wrote the letter.That moment of good humour almost made her have second thoughts about the need to die, but she had already taken the pills, it was too late to turn back.



Anyway, she had had such moments before and, besides, she was not killing herself because she was a sad, embittered woman, constantly depressed. She had spent many afternoons walking gaily along the streets of Ljubljana or gazing—from the window in her convent room—at the snow falling on the small

square with its statue of the poet. Once, for almost a month, she had felt as if she were walking on air, all because a complete stranger, in the middle of that very square, had given her a flower.



She believed herself to be completely normal. Two very simple reasons lay behind her decision to die, and she was sure that, were she to leave a note explaining, many people would agree with her.



The first reason: everything in her life was the same and, once her youth was gone, it would be downhill

all the way, with old age beginning to leave irreversible marks, the onset of illness, the departure of friends. She would gain nothing by continuing to live; indeed, the likelihood of suffering only increased.



The second reason was more philosophical: Veronika read the newspapers, watched TV, and she was aware of what was going on in the world. Everything was wrong, and she had no way of putting things right—that gave her a sense of complete powerlessness.





In a short while, though, she would have the final experience of her life, which promised to be very different: death. She wrote the letter to the magazine, then abandoned the topic, and concentrated on more pressing matters, more appropriate to what she was living, or, rather, dying, through at that moment.



She tried to imagine what it would be like to die, but failed to reach any conclusion.



Besides, there was no point worrying about that, for in a few minutes’ time she would know. How many minutes?

She had no idea. But she relished the thought that she was about to find out the answer to the question that everyone asked themselves: does God exist?



Unlike many people, this had not been the great inner debate of her life. Under the old Communist regime, the official line in schools had been that life ended with death and she had got used to the idea.

On the other hand, her parents’ generation and her grandparents’ generation still went to church, said prayers and went on pilgrimages, and were utterly convinced that God listened to what they said.



At twenty-four, having experienced everything she could experience—and that was no small achievement—Veronika was almost certain that everything ended with death. That is why she had chosen suicide: freedom at last. Eternal oblivion.



In her heart of hearts, though, there was still a doubt: what if God did exist? Thousands of years of civilization had made of suicide a taboo, an affront to all religious codes: man struggles to survive, not to succumb. The human race must procreate. Society needs workers. A couple has to have a reason to stay together, even when love has ceased to exist, and a country needs soldiers, politicians and artists.





‘If God exists, and I truly don’t believe he does, he will know that there are limits to human

understanding. He was the one who created this confusion in which there is poverty, injustice, greed and loneliness. He doubtless had the best of intentions, but the results have proved disastrous; if God exists,

He will be generous with those creatures who chose to leave this Earth early, and he might even apologise for having made us spend time here.’



To hell with taboos and superstitions. Her devout mother would say: God knows the past, the present and the future. In that case, He had placed her in this world in the full knowledge that she would end up

killing herself, and He would not be shocked by her actions.





Veronika began to feel a slight nausea, which became rapidly more intense.



In a few moments, she would no longer be able to concentrate on the square outside her window. She knew it was winter, it must have been about four o’clock in the afternoon, and the sun was setting fast. She knew that other people would go on living. At that moment, a young man passed her window and

saw her, utterly unaware that she was about to die. A group of Bolivian musicians (where is Bolivia? why don’t magazine articles ask that?) were playing in front of the statue of France Pre?eren, the great

Slovenian poet, who had made such a profound impact on the soul of his people.



Would she live to hear the end of that music drifting up from the square? It would be a beautiful memory

of this life: the late afternoon, a melody recounting the dreams of a country on the other side of the world,

the warm cosy room, the handsome young man passing by, full of life, who had decided to stop and was now standing looking up at her. She realised that the pills were beginning to take effect and that he was

the last person who would see her.



He smiled. She returned his smile—she had nothing to lose. He waved; she decided to pretend she was looking at something else, the young man was going too far. Disconcerted, he continued on his way, forgetting that face at the window for ever.



But Veronika was glad to have felt desired by somebody one last time. She wasn’t killing herself

because of a lack of love. It wasn’t because she felt unloved by her family, or had money problems or an incurable disease.



Veronika had decided to die on that lovely Ljubjlana afternoon, with Bolivian musicians playing in the square, with a young man passing by her window, and she was happy with what her eyes could see and

her ears hear. She was even happier that she would not have to go on seeing those same things for

another thirty, forty or fifty years, because they would lose all their originality and be transformed into the tragedy of a life in which everything repeats itself and where one day is exactly like another.





Her stomach was beginning to churn now and she was feeling very ill indeed. ‘It’s odd, I thought an overdose of tranquillizers would send me straight to sleep.’ What she was experiencing, though, was a strange buzzing in her ears and a desire to vomit.



‘If I throw up, I won’t die.’



She decided not to think about the stabbing pains in her stomach and tried to concentrate on the rapidly falling night, on the Bolivians, on the people who were starting to shut up their shops and go home. The





noise in her ears was becoming more and more strident and, for the first time since she had taken the pills, Veronika felt fear, a terrible fear of the unknown.



It did not last long. Soon afterwards, she lost consciousness.When she opened her eyes, Veronika did not think ‘this must be heaven’. Heaven would never use a fluorescent tube to light a room, and the

pain—which started a fraction of a second later—was typical of the Earth. Ah, that Earth pain—unique, unmistakable.Error! Reference source not found.



She tried to move and the pain increased. A series of bright dots appeared, but, even so,Veronika knew that those dots were not the stars of Paradise, but the consequences of the intense pain she was feeling.



‘She's coming round,’ she heard a woman say. ‘You've landed slap bang in hell, so you’d better make the most of it.’



No, it couldn't be true, that voice was deceiving her. It wasn't hell, because she felt really cold and she was aware of plastic tubes coming out of her nose and mouth. One of the tubes—the one stuck down

her throat—made her feel as if she were choking.



She made as if to remove it, but her arms were strapped down.



‘I'm joking, it's not really hell,’ the voice went on. ‘It's worse than hell, not that I’ve ever actually been there. You’re in Villette.’



Despite the pain and the feeling of choking, Veronika realised at once what had happened. She had tried

to kill herself and someone had arrived in time to save her. It could have been one of the nuns, a friend who had decided to drop by unannounced, someone delivering something she had forgotten she had ordered. The fact is, she had survived, and she was in Villette.



Villette, the famous and much-feared lunatic asylum, which had been in existence since 1991, the year of

the country's independence. At that time, believing that the partitioning of the former Yugoslavia would be achieved through peaceful means (after all, Slovenia had only experienced eleven days of war), a group

of European businessmen had obtained permission to set up a hospital for mental patients in an old barracks, abandoned because of high maintenance costs.



Shortly afterwards, however, the wars commenced: first in Croatia, then in Bosnia. The businessmen were worried. The money for the investment came from capitalists scattered all round the globe, from

people whose names they didn't even know, so there was no possibility of sitting down in front of them, offering a few excuses and asking them to be patient.They resolved the problem by adopting practices which were far from commendable in a psychiatric hospital, and for the young nation that had just

emerged from a benign communism, Villette came to symbolise all the worst aspects of capitalism: to be admitted to the hospital, all you needed was money.



There was no shortage of people who, in their desire to get rid of some family member because of arguments over an inheritance (or over that person’s embarrassing behaviour), were willing to pay large sums of money to obtain a medical report that would allow the internment of their problematic children or parents. Others, fleeing from debts or trying to justify certain attitudes that could otherwise result in long prison sentences, spent a brief time in the asylum and then simply left without paying any penalty or undergoing any judicial process.





Villette was the place from which no one had ever escaped, where genuine madmen—sent there by the courts or by other hospitals—mingled with those merely accused of madness or those pretending to be mad. The result was utter confusion, and the press were constantly publishing tales of ill-treatment and abuse, although they had never been given permission to visit Villette and actually see what was

happening. The government was investigating the complaints, but could get no proof; the shareholders threatened to spread the word that foreign investment was difficult in Slovenia, and so the institution managed to remain afloat, indeed, it went from strength to strength.



‘My aunt killed herself a few months ago,’ the female voice continued. ‘For almost eight years she was

too afraid to even leave her room, eating, getting fat, smoking, taking tranquillisers and sleeping most of the time. She had two daughters and a husband who loved her.’



Veronika tried to move her head in the direction of the voice, but failed.



‘I only saw her fight back once, when her husband took a lover. Then she kicked up a fuss, lost a few pounds, smashed some glasses and—for weeks on end—kept the rest of the whole neighbourhood awake with her shouting. Absurd though it may seem, I think that was the happiest time of her life. She was fighting for something, she felt alive and capable of responding to the challenges facing her.’



‘What's all that got to do with me?’ thought Veronika, unable to say anything. ‘I'm not your aunt and I

haven't got a husband.’



‘In the end, her husband got rid of his lover,’ said the woman, ‘and gradually, my aunt returned to her former passivity. One day, she phoned to say that she wanted to change her life: she'd given up smoking. That same week, after increasing the number of tranquillisers she was taking because she'd stopped smoking, she told everyone that she wanted to kill herself.



No one believed her. Then, one morning, she left a message on my answerphone, saying goodbye, and she gassed herself. I listened to that message several times: I had never heard her sound so calm, so

resigned to her fate. She said she was neither happy nor unhappy, and that was why she couldn't go on.’



Veronika felt sorry for the woman telling the story, for she seemed to be doing so in an attempt to understand her aunt's death. In a world where everyone struggles to survive whatever the cost, how could one judge those people who decide to die?



No one can judge. Each person knows the extent of their own suffering, or the total absence of meaning

in their lives. Veronika wanted to explain that, but instead she choked on the tube in her mouth and the woman hurried to her aid.



She saw the woman bending over her bound body, which was full of tubes and protected against her will, her freely expressed desire to destroy it. She moved her head from side to side, pleading with her eyes for them to remove the tubes and let her die in peace.



‘You're upset,’ said the woman. ‘I don't know if you're sorry for what you did or if you still want to die;

that doesn't interest me. What interests me is doing my job. If the patient gets agitated, the regulations say

I must give them a sedative.’



Veronika stopped struggling, but the nurse was already injecting something into her arm. Soon afterwards, she was back in a strange dreamless world, where the only thing she could remember was

the face of the woman she had just seen: green eyes, brown hair, and a very distant air, the air of someone doing things because she has to do them, never questioning why the rules say this or that.





Paulo Coelho heard about Veronika's story three months later when he was having supper in an Algerian restaurant in Paris with a Slovenian friend, also called Veronika, who happened to be the daughter of the doctor in charge at Villette.



Later, when he decided to write a book about the subject, he considered changing his friend's name in order not to confuse the reader. He thought of calling her Blaska or Edwina or Marietzja, or some other Slovenian name, but he ended up keeping the real names. When he referred to his friend Veronika, he would call her his friend, Veronika. When he referred to the other Veronika, there would be no need to describe her at all, because she would be the central character in the book, and people would get

irritated if they were always having to read ‘Veronika the mad woman,’ or ‘Veronika the one who tried

to commit suicide’. Besides, both he and his friend Veronika would only take up a very brief part of the book, this part.



His friend Veronika was horrified at what her father had done, especially bearing in mind that he was the director of an institution seeking respectability and was himself working on a thesis that would be judged

by the conventional academic community.



‘Do you know where the word “asylum” comes from?’ she was saying. ‘It dates back to the Middle Ages, from a person’s right to seek refuge in churches and other holy places. The right of asylum is something any civilised person can understand. So how could my father, the director of an asylum, treat someone like that?’



Paulo Coelho wanted to know all the details of what had happened, because he had a genuine reason for finding out about Veronika's story.



The reason was the following: he himself had been admitted into an asylum or, rather, mental hospital as they were better known. And this had happened not once, but three times, in 1965, 1966 and 1967. The place where he had been interned was the Dr Eiras Sanatorium in Rio de Janeiro.



Precisely why he had been admitted into hospital was something which, even today, he found odd;

perhaps his parents were confused by his unusual behaviour, half-shy, half-extrovert, and by his desire to

be an ‘artist’, something that everyone in the family considered a perfect recipe for ending up as a social outcast and dying in poverty.



When he thought about it—and, it must be said, he rarely did—he considered the real madman to have

been the doctor who had agreed to admit him for the flimsiest of reasons (as in any family, the tendency is always to place the blame on others, and to state adamantly that the parents didn't know what they were doing when they took that drastic decision).





Paulo laughed when he learned of the strange letter to the newspapers that Veronika had left behind, complaining that an important French magazine didn't even know where Slovenia was.



‘No one would kill themselves over something like that.’



‘That's why the letter had no effect,’ said his friend Veronika, embarrassed. ‘Yesterday, when I checked

in at the hotel, the receptionist thought Slovenia was a town in Germany.’



He knew the feeling, for many foreigners believed the Argentine city of Buenos Aires to be the capital of





Brazil.



But apart from having foreigners blithely compliment him on the beauty of his country’s capital city

(which was to be found in the neighbouring country of Argentina), Paulo Coelho shared with Veronika

the fact just mentioned, but which is worth restating: he too had been admitted into a mental hospital, and,

as his first wife had once remarked, ‘should never have been let out’.



But he was let out. And when he left the sanatorium for the last time, determined never to go back, he had made two promises: (a) that he would one day write about the subject and (b) that he would wait until both his parents were dead before touching publicly on the issue, because he didn't want to hurt them, since both had spent many years of their lives blaming themselves for what they had done.



His mother had died in 1993, but his father, who had turned eighty-four in 1997, was still alive and in full possession of his mental faculties and his health, despite having emphysema of the lungs (even though he'd never smoked) and despite living entirely off frozen food because he couldn't get a housekeeper who

could put up with his eccentricities.



So, when Paulo Coelho heard Veronika's story, he discovered a way of talking about the issue without breaking his promises. Even though he had never considered suicide, he had an intimate knowledge of

the world of the mental hospital—the treatments, the relationships between doctors and patients, the comforts and anxieties of living in a place like that.



So let us allow Paulo Coelho and his friend Veronika to leave this book for good and let us get on with the story.



Veronika didn't know how long she had slept. She remembered waking up at one point—still with the life-giving tubes in her mouth and nose—and hearing a voice say:



‘Do you want me to masturbate you?’



But now, looking round the room with her eyes wide open, she didn't know if that had been real or an hallucination. Apart from that one memory, she could remember nothing, absolutely nothing.



The tubes had been taken out, but she still had needles stuck all over her body, wires connected to the area around her heart and her head, and her arms were still strapped down. She was naked, covered

only by a sheet, and she felt cold, but she was determined not to complain.The small area surrounded by green curtains was filled by the bed she was lying on, the machinery of the Intensive Care Unit and a

white chair on which a nurse was sitting reading a book.



This time, the woman had dark eyes and brown hair. Even so, Veronika was not sure if it was the same person she had talked to hours—or was it days?—ago.



‘Can you unstrap my arms?’



The nurse looked up, said a brusque ‘No’, and went back to her book.



I'm alive, thought Veronika. Everything's going to start all over again. I'll have to stay in here for a while, until they realise that I’m perfectly normal. Then they'll let me out, and I'll see the streets of Ljubljana

again, its main square, the bridges, the people going to and from work.



Since people always tend to help others—just so that they can feel they are better than they really





are—they'll give me my job back at the library. In time, I'll start frequenting the same bars and nightclubs,

I'll talk to my friends about the injustices and problems of the world, I'll go to the cinema, take walks around the lake.



Since I only took sleeping pills, I'm not disfigured in any way: I'm still young, pretty, intelligent, I won't have any difficulty in getting boyfriends, I never did. I'll make love with them in their houses, or in the

woods, I'll feel a certain degree of pleasure, but the moment I reach orgasm, the feeling of emptiness will return. We won't have much to talk about, and both he and I will know it. The time will come to make

our excuses—‘It's late’, or ‘I have to get up early tomorrow’—and we'll part as quickly as possible, avoiding looking each other in the eye.



I'll go back to my rented room in the convent. I'll try and read a book, turn on the TV to see the same

old programmes, set the alarm clock to wake up at exactly the same time I woke up the day before and mechanically repeat my tasks at the library. I'll eat a sandwich in the park opposite the theatre, sitting on

the same bench, along with other people who also choose the same benches on which to sit and have

their lunch, people who all have the same vacant look, but pretend to be pondering extremely important matters.



Then I'll go back to work, I'll listen to the gossip about who's going out with whom, who's suffering from what, how such and such a person was in tears about her husband, and I'll be left with the feeling that I'm privileged: I'm pretty, I have a job, I can have any boyfriend I choose. So I’ll go back to the bars at the

end of the day, and the whole thing will start again.



My mother, who must be out of her mind with worry over my suicide attempt, will recover from the

shock and will keep asking me what I'm going to do with my life, why I'm not the same as everyone else, things really aren't as complicated as I think they are. ‘Look at me, for example, I've been married to

your father for years, and I've tried to give you the best possible upbringing and set you the best possible example.’





One day, I'll get tired of hearing her constantly repeating the same things, and to please her I'll marry a man whom I oblige myself to love. He and I will end up finding a way of dreaming of a future together: a

house in the country, children, our children's future. We'll make love often in the first year, less in the second, and after the third year, people perhaps think about sex only once a fortnight and transform that thought into action only once a month. Even worse, we'll barely talk. I'll force myself to accept the

situation, and I'll wonder what's wrong with me, because he no longer takes any interest in me, ignores me, and does nothing but talk about his friends, as if they were his real world.



When the marriage is just about to fall apart, I'll get pregnant. We'll have a child, feel closer to each other for a while, and then the situation will go back to what it was before.



I'll begin to put on weight like the aunt that nurse was talking about yesterday—or was it days ago, I don't really know. And I'll start to go on diets, systematically defeated each day, each week, by the weight that keeps creeping up regardless of the controls I put on it. At that point, I'll take those magic pills that stop you feeling depressed, then I'll have a few more children, conceived during nights of love

that pass all too quickly. I'll tell everyone that the children are my reason for living, when in reality my life

is their reason for living.



People will always consider us a happy couple, and no one will know how much solitude, bitterness and resignation lies beneath the surface happiness.





Until one day, when my husband takes a lover for the first time, and I will perhaps kick up a fuss like the nurse's aunt, or think again of killing myself. By then, though, I'll be too old and cowardly, with two or

three children who need my help, and I'll have to bring them up and help them find a place in the world before I can just abandon everything. I won't commit suicide: I'll make a scene, I'll threaten to leave and take the children with me. Like all men, my husband will back down, he'll tell me he loves me and that it won't happen again. It won't even occur to him that, if I really did decide to leave, my only option would

be to go back to my parents' house and stay there for the rest of my life, forced to listen to my mother going on and on all day about how I lost my one opportunity for being happy, that he was a wonderful husband despite his peccadillos, that my children will be traumatised by the separation.



Two or three years later, another woman will appear in his life. I'll find out—because I saw them, or

because someone told me—but this time I'll pretend I don't know. I used up all my energy fighting against that other lover, I've no energy left, it's best to accept life as it really is, and not as I imagined it to be. My mother was right.



He will continue being a considerate husband, I will continue working at the library, eating my sandwiches in the square opposite the theatre, reading books I never quite manage to finish, watching television programmes that are the same as they were ten, twenty, fifty years ago.



Except that I'll eat my sandwiches with a sense of guilt, because I'm getting fatter; and I won't go to bars any more, because I have a husband expecting me to come home and look after the children.



After that, it's a matter of waiting for the children to grow up and of spending all day thinking about suicide, without the courage to do anything about it. One fine day, I'll reach the conclusion that that's what life is like, there's no point worrying about it, nothing will change. And I'll accept it.





Veronika brought her interior monologue to a close and made a promise to herself: she would not leave Villette alive. It was best to put an end to everything now, while she was still brave and healthy enough to die.



Before these statements left my desk and followed the fate I eventually chose for
them, I considered using them as the basis for a traditional, painstakingly
researched biography, recounting a true story. And so I read various biographies,
thinking this would help me, only to realise that the biographer's view of his
subject inevitably influences the results of his research. Since it wasn't my intention
to impose my own opinions on the reader, but to set down the story of the 'Witch
of Portobello' as seen by its main protagonists, I soon abandoned the idea of
writing a straight biography and decided that the best approach would be simply to
transcribe what people had told me.
Heron Ryan, 44, journalist
No one lights a lamp in order to hide it behind the door: the purpose of light is to
create more light, to open people's eyes, to reveal the marvels around.
No one sacrifices the most important thing she possesses: love.
No one places her dreams in the hands of those who might destroy them. No one,
that is, but Athena.
A long time after Athena's death, her former teacher asked me to go with her to
the town of Prestonpans in Scotland. There, taking advantage of certain ancient
feudal powers which were due to be abolished the following month, the town had
granted official pardons to 81 people – and their cats – who were executed in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries for practising witchcraft.
According to the official spokeswoman for the Barons Courts of Prestoungrange
& Dolphinstoun: 'Most of those persons condemned…were convicted on the
basis of spectral evidence – that is to say, prosecuting witnesses declared that they
felt the presence of evil spirits or heard spirit voices.'
There's no point now in going into all the excesses committed by the Inquisition,
with its torture chambers and its bonfires lit by hatred and vengeance; however, on
our way to Prestonpans, Edda said several times that there was something about
that gesture which she found unacceptable: the town and the 14th Baron of
Prestoungrange & Dolphinstoun were 'granting pardons' to people who had been
brutally executed.
'Here we are in the twenty-first century, and yet the descendants of the real
criminals, those who killed the innocent victims, still feel they have the right to
grant pardons. Do you know what I mean, Heron?'
I did. A new witch-hunt is starting to gain ground. This time the weapon isn't the
red-hot iron, but irony and repression. Anyone who happens to discover a gift and
dares to speak of their abilities is usually regarded with distrust. Generally speaking,
their husband, wife, father or child, or whoever, instead of feeling proud, forbids
all mention of the matter, fearful of exposing their family to ridicule.
Before I met Athena, I thought all such gifts were a dishonest way of exploiting
people's despair. My trip to Transylvania to make a documentary on vampires was
also a way of proving how easily people are deceived. Certain superstitions,
however absurd they may seem, remain in the human imagination and are often
used by unscrupulous people. When I visited Dracula's castle, which has been
reconstructed merely to give tourists the feeling that they're in a special place, I was
approached by a government official, who implied that I would receive a
'significant' (to use his word) gift when the film was shown on the BBC. In the
mind of that official, I was helping to propagate the myth, and thus deserved a
generous reward. One of the guides said that the number of visitors increased each
year, and that any mention of the place would prove positive, even a programme
saying that the castle was a fake, that Vlad Dracula was a historical figure who had
nothing to do with the myth, and that it was all merely a product of the wild
imaginings of one Irishman (Editor's note: Bram Stoker), who had never even
visited the region.
I knew then that, however rigorous I was with the facts, I was unwittingly
collaborating with the lie; even if the idea behind my script was to demythologise
the place, people would believe what they wanted to believe; the guide was right, I
would simply be helping to generate more publicity. I immediately abandoned the
project, even though I'd already spent quite a lot of money on the trip and on my
research.
And yet my journey to Transylvania was to have a huge impact on my life, for I
met Athena there when she was trying to track down her mother. Destiny –
mysterious, implacable Destiny – brought us face to face in the insignificant foyer
of a still more insignificant hotel. I was witness to her first conversation with
Deidre – or Edda, as she likes to be called. I watched, as if I were a spectator of
my own life, as my heart struggled vainly not to allow itself to be seduced by a
woman who didn't belong to my world. I applauded when reason lost the battle,
and all I could do was surrender and accept that I was in love.
That love led me to see things I'd never imagined could exist – rituals,
materialisations, trances. Believing that I was blinded by love, I doubted everything,
but doubt, far from paralysing me, pushed me in the direction of oceans whose
very existence I couldn't admit. It was this same energy which, in difficult times,
helped me to confront the cynicism ofjournalist colleagues and to write about
Athena and her work. And since that love remains alive, the energy remains, even
though Athena is dead, even though all I want now is to forget what I saw and
learned. I could only navigate that world while hand in hand with Athena.
These were her gardens, her rivers, her mountains. Now that she's gone, I need
everything to return as quickly as possible to how it used to be. I'm going to
concentrate more on traffic problems, Britain's foreign policy, on how we
administer taxes. I want to go back to thinking that the world of magic is merely a
clever trick, that people are superstitious, that anything science cannot explain has
no right to exist.
When the meetings in Portobello started to get out of control, we had endless
arguments about how she was behaving, although I'm glad now that she didn't
listen to me. If there is any possible consolation in the tragedy of losing someone
we love very much, it's the necessary hope that perhaps it was for the best.
I wake and fall asleep with that certainty; it's best that Athena left when she did
rather than descend into the infernos of this world. She would never have regained
her peace of mind after the events that earned her the nickname 'the witch of
Portobello'. The rest of her life would have been a bitter clash between her
personal dreams and collective reality. Knowing her as I did, she would have
battled on to the end, wasting her energy and her joy on trying to prove something
that no one, absolutely no one, was prepared to believe.
Who knows, perhaps she sought death the way a shipwreck victim seeks an island.
She must have stood late at night in many a Tube station, waiting for muggers who
never came. She must have walked through the most dangerous parts of London
in search of a murderer who never appeared, or perhaps tried to provoke the
anger of the physically strong, who refused to get angry.
Until, finally, she managed to get herself brutally murdered. But, then, how many of
us will be saved the pain of seeing the most important things in our lives
disappearing from one moment to the next? I don't just mean people, but our
ideas and dreams too: we might survive a day, a week, a few years, but we're all
condemned to lose. Our body remains alive, yet, sooner or later, our soul will
receive the mortal blow. The perfect crime – for we don't know who murdered our
joy, what their motives were or where the guilty parties are to be found.
Are they aware of what they've done, those nameless guilty parties? I doubt it,
because they, too the depressed, the arrogant, the impotent and the powerful – are
the victims of the reality they created.
They don't understand and would be incapable of understanding Athena's world.
Yes, that's the best way to think of it – Athena's world. I'm finally coming to accept
that I was only a temporary inhabitant, there as a favour, like someone who finds
themselves in a beautiful mansion, eating exquisite food, aware that this is only a
party, that the mansion belongs to someone else, that the food was bought by
someone else, and that the time will come when the lights will go out, the owners
will go to bed, the servants will return to their quarters, the door will close, and we'll
be out in the street again, waiting for a taxi or a bus to restore us to the mediocrity
of our everyday lives.
I'm going back, or, rather, part of me is going back to that world where only what
we can see, touch and explain makes sense. I want to get back to the world of
speeding tickets, people arguing with bank cashiers, eternal complaints about the
weather, to horror films and Formula 1 racing. This is the universe I'll have to live
with for the rest of my days. I'll get married, have children, and the past will
become a distant memory, which will, in the end, make me ask myself: How could
I have been so blind? How could I have been so ingenuous?
I also know that, at night, another part of me will remain wandering in space, in
contact with things as real as the pack of cigarettes and the glass of gin before me
now. My soul will dance with Athena's soul; I'll be with her while I sleep; I'll wake
up sweating and go into the kitchen for a glass of water. I'll understand that in
order to combat ghosts you must use weapons that form no part of reality. Then,
following the advice of my grandmother, I'll place an open pair of scissors on my
bedside table to snip off the end of the dream.
The next day, I'll look at the scissors with a touch of regret, but I must adapt to
living in the world again or risk going mad.
Andrea McCain, 32, actress
'No one can manipulate anyone else. In any relationship, both parties know what
they're doing, even if one of them complains later on that they were used.'
That's what Athena used to say, but she herself behaved quite differently, because
she used and manipulated me with no consideration for my feelings. And given
that we're talking about magic here, this makes the accusation an even more
serious one; after all, she was my teacher, charged with passing on the sacred
mysteries, with awakening the unknown force we all possess. When we venture
into that unfamiliar sea, we trust blindly in those who guide us, believing that they
know more than we do.
Well, I can guarantee that they don't. Not Athena, not Edda, nor any of the people
I came to know through them. She told me she was learning through teaching, and
although, at first, I refused to believe this, later, I came to think that perhaps it was
true. I realised it was one of her many ways of getting us to drop our guard and
surrender to her charm.
People who are on a spiritual quest don't think, they simply want results. They
want to feel powerful and superior to the anonymous masses. They want to be
special. Athena played with other people's feelings in a quite terrifying way.
I understand that she once felt a profound admiration for St Thérèse of Lisieux. I
have no interest in the Catholic faith, but, from what I've heard, Thérèse
experienced a kind of mystical and physical union with God. Athena mentioned
once that she would like to share a similar fate. Well, in that case, she should have
joined a convent and devoted her life to prayer or to the service of the poor. That
would have been much more useful to the world and far less dangerous than using
music and rituals to induce in people a kind of intoxicated state that brought them
into contact with both the best and the worst of themselves.
I sought her out when I was looking for some meaning to my life, although I didn't
say as much at our first meeting. I should have realised from the start that Athena
wasn't very interested in that; she wanted to live, dance, make love, travel, to gather
people around her in order to demonstrate how wise she was, to show off her
gifts, to provoke the neighbours, to make the most of all that is profane in us –
although she always tried to give a spiritual gloss to that search.
Whenever we met, whether it was to perform some magical ceremony or to meet
for a drink, I was conscious of her power. It was so strong I could almost touch it.
Initially, I was fascinated and wanted to be like her. But one day, in a bar, she
started talking about the 'Third Rite', which has to do with sexuality. She did this in
the presence of my boyfriend. Her excuse was that she was teaching me
something. Her real objective, in my opinion, was to seduce the man I loved.
And, of course, she succeeded.
It isn't good to speak ill of people who have passed from this life onto the astral
plane. However, Athena won't have to account to me, but to all those forces
which she turned to her own benefit, rather than channelling them for the good of
humanity and for her own spiritual enlightenment.
The worst thing is that if it hadn't been for her compulsive exhibitionism,
everything we began together could have worked out really well. Had she behaved
more discreetly, we would now be fulfilling the mission with which we were
entrusted. But she couldn't control herself; she thought she was the mistress of the
truth, capable of overcoming all barriers merely by using her powers of seduction.
And the result? I was left alone. And I can't leave the work half-finished – I'll have
to continue to the end, even though sometimes I feel very weak and often
dispirited.
I'm not surprised that her life ended as it did: she was always flirting with danger.
They say that extroverts are unhappier than introverts, and have to compensate
for this by constantly proving to themselves how happy and contented and at ease
with life they are. In her case, at least, this is absolutely true.
Athena was conscious of her own charisma, and she made all those who loved her
suffer. Including me.
Deidre O'Neill, 37, doctor, known as Edda
If a man we don't know phones us up one day and talks a little, makes no
suggestions, says nothing special, but nevertheless pays us the kind of attention we
rarely receive, we're quite capable of going to bed with him that same night, feeling
relatively in love. That's what we women are like, and there's nothing wrong with
that – it's the nature of the female to open herself to love easily.
It was this same love that opened me up to my first encounter with the Mother
when I was nineteen. Athena was the same age the first time she went into a trance
while dancing. But that's the only thing we had in common – the age of our
initiation.
In every other aspect, we were totally and profoundly different, especially in the
way we dealt with other people. As her teacher, I always did my best to help her in
her inner search. As her friend – although I'm not sure my feelings of friendship
were reciprocated – I tried to alert her to the fact that the world wasn't ready for
the kind of transformations she wanted to provoke. I remember spending a few
sleepless nights before deciding to allow her to act with total freedom and follow
the demands of her heart.
Her greatest problem was that she was a woman of the twenty-second century
living in the twentyfirst, and making no secret of the fact either. Did she pay a
price? She certainly did. But she would have paid a still higher price if she had
repressed her true exuberant self. She would have been bitter and frustrated, always
concerned about 'what other people might think', always saying 'I'll just sort these
things out, then I'll devote myself to my dream', always complaining 'that the
conditions are never quite right'.
Everyone's looking for the perfect teacher, but although their teachings might be
divine, teachers are all too human, and that's something people find hard to accept.
Don't confuse the teacher with the lesson, the ritual with the ecstasy, the
transmitter of the symbol with the symbol itself. The Tradition is linked to our
encounter with the forces of life and not with the people who bring this about. But
we are weak: we ask the Mother to send us guides, and all she sends are signs to
the road we need to follow.
Pity those who seek for shepherds, instead of longing for freedom! An encounter
with the superior energy is open to anyone, but remains far from those who shift
responsibility onto others. Our time on this Earth is sacred, and we should
celebrate every moment.
The importance of this has been completely forgotten: even religious holidays
have been transformed into opportunities to go to the beach or the park or skiing.
There are no more rituals. Ordinary actions can no longer be transformed into
manifestations of the sacred. We cook and complain that it's a waste of time, when
we should be pouring our love into making that food. We work and believe it's a
divine curse, when we should be using our skills to bring pleasure and to spread
the energy of the Mother.
Athena brought to the surface the immensely rich world we all carry in our souls,
without realising that people aren't yet ready to accept their own powers.
We women, when we're searching for a meaning to our lives or for the path of
knowledge, always identify with one of four classic archetypes.
The Virgin (and I'm not speaking here of a sexual virgin) is the one whose search
springs from her complete independence, and everything she learns is the fruit of
her ability to face challenges alone.
The Martyr finds her way to self-knowledge through pain, surrender and suffering.
The Saint finds her true reason for living in unconditional love and in her ability to
give without asking anything in return.
Finally, the Witch justifies her existence by going in search of complete and
limitless pleasure. Normally, a woman has to choose from one of these traditional
feminine archetypes, but Athena was all four at once.
Obviously we can justify her behaviour, alleging that all those who enter a state of
trance or ecstasy lose contact with reality. That's not true: the physical world and
the spiritual world are the same thing. We can see the Divine in each speck of dust,
but that doesn't stop us wiping it away with a wet sponge. The Divine doesn't
disappear; it's transformed into the clean surface.
Athena should have been more careful. When I reflect upon the life and death of
my pupil, it seems to me that I had better change the way I behave too.
Lella Zainab, 64, numerologist
Athena? What an interesting name! Let's see…her Maximum number is nine.
Optimistic, sociable, likely to be noticed in a crowd. People might go to her in
search of understanding, compassion, generosity, and for precisely that reason, she
should be careful, because that tendency to popularity could go to her head and
she'll end up losing more than she gains. She should also watch her tongue,
because she tends to speak more than common sense dictates.
As for her Minimum number eleven, I sense that she longs for some leadership
position. She has an interest in mystical subjects and through these tries to bring
harmony to those around her.
However, this is in direct conflict with the number nine, which is the sum of the
day, month and year of her birth reduced to a single figure: she'll always be subject
to envy, sadness, introversion and impulsive decisions. She must be careful not to
let herself be affected by negative vibrations: excessive ambition, intolerance,
abuse of power, extravagance.
Because of that conflict, I suggest she take up some career that doesn't involve
emotional contact with people, like computing or engineering.
Oh, she's dead? I'm sorry. So what did she do?
What did Athena do? She did a little of everything, but, ifI had to summarise her life, I'd say:
she was a priestess who understood the forces of nature. Or, rather, she was someone who, by the
simple fact of having little to lose or to hope for in life, took greater risks than other people and
ended up being transformed into the forces she thought she mastered.
She was a supermarket checkout girl, a bank employee, a property dealer, and in each of these
positions she always revealed the priestess within. I lived with herfor eight years, and I owed her
this: to recover her memory, her identity.
The most difficult thing in collecting together these statements was persuading people to let me use
their real names. Some said they didn't want to be involved in this kind of story; others tried to
conceal their opinions andfeelings. I explained that my real intention was to help all those involved
to understand her better, and that no reader would believe in anonymous statements.
They finally agreed because they all believed that they knew the unique and definitive version of any
event, however insignificant. During the recordings, I saw that things are never absolute; they
depend on each individual's perceptions. And the best way to know who we are is often to find out
how others see us.
This doesn't mean that we should do what others expect us to do, but it helps us to understand
ourselves better. I owed it to Athena to recover her story, to write her myth.
Samira R. Khalil, 57, housewife, Athena's mother
Please, don't call her Athena. Her real name is Sherine. Sherine Khalil, our
much-loved, muchwanted daughter, whom both my husband and I wish we had
engendered.
Life, however, had other plans – when fate is very generous with us, there is always
a well into which all our dreams can tumble.
We lived in Beirut in the days when everyone considered it the most beautiful city
in the Middle
East. My husband was a successful industrialist, we married for love, we travelled to
Europe every year, we had friends, we were invited to all the important social
events, and, once, the President of the United States himself visited my house.
Imagine that! Three unforgettable days, during two of which the American secret
service scoured every corner of our house (they'd been in the area for more than a
month already, taking up strategic positions, renting apartments, disguising
themselves as beggars or young lovers). And for one day, or, rather, two hours, we
partied. I'll never forget the look of envy in our friends' eyes, and the excitement of
having our photo taken alongside the most powerful man on the planet.
We had it all, apart from the one thing we wanted most – a child. And so we had
nothing.
We tried everything: we made vows and promises, went to places where miracles
were guaranteed, we consulted doctors, witchdoctors, took remedies and drank
elixirs and magic potions. I had artificial insemination twice and lost the baby both
times. On the second occasion, I also lost my left ovary, and, after that, no doctor
was prepared to risk such a venture again.
That was when one of the many friends who knew of our plight suggested the one
possible solution: adoption. He said he had contacts in Romania, and that the
process wouldn't take long.
A month later, we got on a plane. Our friend had important business dealings with
the dictator who ruled the country at the time, and whose name I now forget
(Editor's note: Nicolae Ceauºescu), and so we managed to avoid the bureaucratic
red tape and went straight to an adoption centre in Sibiu, in Transylvania. There
we were greeted with coffee, cigarettes, mineral water, and with the paperwork
signed and sealed, all we had to do was choose a child.
They took us to a very cold nursery, and I couldn't imagine how they could leave
those poor children in such a place. My first instinct was to adopt them all, to carry
them off to Lebanon where there was sun and freedom, but obviously that was a
crazy idea. We walked up and down between the cots, listening to the children
crying, terrified by the magnitude of the decision we were about to take.
For more than an hour, neither I nor my husband spoke a word. We went out,
drank coffee, smoked and then went back in again – and this happened several
times. I noticed that the woman in charge of adoptions was growing impatient; she
wanted an immediate decision. At that moment, following an instinct I would dare
to describe as maternal – as if I'd found a child who should have been mine in this
incarnation, but who had come into the world in another woman's womb – I
pointed to one particular baby girl.
The woman advised us to think again. And she'd been so impatient for us to make
a decision! But I was sure.
Nevertheless – trying not to hurt my feelings (she thought we had contacts in the
upper echelons of the Romanian government) – she whispered to me, so that my
husband wouldn't hear: 'I know it won't work out. She's the daughter of a gipsy.'
I retorted that culture isn't something that's transmitted through the genes. The
child, who was barely three months old, would be our daughter, brought up
according to our customs. She would go to our church, visit our beaches, read
books in French, study at the American School in Beirut. Besides, I knew nothing
about gipsy culture – and I still know nothing. I only know that they travel a lot,
don't wash very often, aren't to be trusted, and wear earrings. Legend has it that
they kidnap children and carry them off in their caravans, but here, exactly the
opposite was happening; they had left a child behind for me to take care of.
The woman tried again to dissuade me, but I was already signing the papers and
asking my husband to do the same. On the flight back to Beirut, the world seemed
different: God had given me a reason for living, working and fighting in this vale of
tears. We now had a child to justify all our efforts.
Sherine grew in wisdom and beauty – I expect all parents say that, but I really do
think she was an exceptional child. One afternoon, when she was five, one of my
brothers said that, if, in the future, she wanted to work abroad, her name would
always betray her origins, and he suggested changing it to one that gave nothing
away, like Athena, for example. Now, of course, I know that Athena refers not
only to the capital of Greece, but that it is also the name of the Greek goddess of
wisdom, intelligence and war.
Perhaps my brother knew not only that, but was aware, too, of the problems an
Arab name might bring in the future, for he was very involved in politics, as were
all our family, and wanted to protect his niece from the black clouds which he, and
only he, could see on the horizon. Most surprising of all was that Sherine liked the
sound of the word. That same afternoon, she began referring to herself as Athena
and no one could persuade her to do otherwise. To please her, we adopted the
nickname too, thinking that it would be a passing fancy.
Can a name affect a person's life? Time passed, and the name stuck.
From very early on we discovered that she had a strong religious vocation – she
spent all her time in the church and knew the gospels by heart; this was at once a
blessing and a curse. In a world that was starting to be divided more and more
along religious lines, I feared for my daughter's safety. It was then that Sherine
began telling us, as if it were the most natural thing in the world, that she had a
series of invisible friends – angels and saints whose images she was accustomed to
seeing in the church we attended. All children everywhere have visions, but they
usually forget about them after a certain age. They also treat inanimate objects,
such as dolls or fluffy tigers, as if they were real. However, I really did feel she was
going too far when I picked her up from school one day, and she told me that
she'd seen 'a woman dressed in white, like the Virgin Mary'.
Naturally, I believe in angels. I even believe that the angels speak to little children,
but when a child starts seeing visions of grown-ups, that's another matter. I've read
about various shepherds and country people who claimed to have seen a woman
in white, and how this eventually destroyed their lives, because others sought them
out, expecting miracles; then the priests took over, their village became a centre of
pilgrimage, and the poor children ended their lives in a convent or a monastery. I
was, therefore, very concerned about this story. Sherine was at an age when she
should be more concerned with make-up kits, painting her nails, watching soppy
TV soaps and children's programmes. There was something wrong with my
daughter, and I consulted an expert.
'Relax,' he said.
According to this paediatrician specialising in child psychology – and according to
most other doctors in the field – invisible friends are a projection of a child's
dreams and a safe way of helping the child to discover her desires and express her
feelings.
'Yes, but a vision of a woman in white?'
He replied that perhaps Sherine didn't understand our way of seeing or explaining
the world. He suggested that we should gradually begin preparing the ground to tell
her that she was adopted. In the paediatrician's words, the worst thing that could
happen would be for her to find out by herself. Then she would begin to doubt
everyone, and her behaviour might become unpredictable.
From then on, we changed the way we talked to her. I don't know how much
children remember of what happens to them, but we started trying to show her just
how much we loved her and that there was no need for her to take refuge in an
imaginary world. She needed to see that her visible universe was as beautiful as it
could possibly be, that her parents would protect her from any danger, that Beirut
was a lovely city and its beaches full of sun and people. Without ever mentioning
'the woman in white', I began spending more time with my daughter; I invited her
schoolfriends to come to our house; I seized every opportunity to shower her with
affection.
The strategy worked. My husband used to travel a lot, and Sherine always missed
him. In the name of love, he resolved to change his way of life a little. Her solitary
conversations began to be replaced by games shared by father, mother and
daughter.
Everything was going well. Then, one night, she came into our room in tears,
saying that she was frightened and that hell was close at hand.
I was alone at home. My husband had had to go away again, and I thought
perhaps this was the reason for her despair. But hell? What were they teaching her
at school or at church? I decided to go and talk to her teacher the next day.
Sherine, meanwhile, wouldn't stop crying. I took her over to the window and
showed her the Mediterranean outside, lit by the full moon. I told her there were
no devils, only stars in the sky and people strolling up and down the boulevard
outside our apartment. I told her not to worry, that she needn't be afraid, but she
continued to weep and tremble. After spending almost half an hour trying to calm
her, I began to get worried. I begged her to stop, after all, she was no longer a
child. I thought perhaps her first period had started and discreetly asked if there
was any blood.
'Yes, lots.'
I got some cotton wool and asked her to lie down so that I could take care of her
'wound'. It wasn't important. I would explain tomorrow. However, her period
hadn't started. She cried for a while longer, but she must have been tired, because
then she fell asleep.
And the following morning, there was blood.
Four men had been murdered. To me, this was just another of the eternal tribal
battles to which my people have become accustomed. To Sherine, it clearly meant
nothing, because she didn't even mention her nightmare.
Meanwhile, from that date onwards, hell came ever closer and it hasn't gone away
since. On that same day, twenty-six Palestinians were killed on a bus, as revenge
for the murders. Twenty-four hours later, it was impossible to walk down the street
because of shots coming from every angle. The schools closed, Sherine was
hurried home by one of her teachers, and the situation went from bad to worse.
My husband interrupted his business trip halfway through and came home, where
he spent whole days on the phone to his friends in government, but no one said
anything that made any sense. Sherine heard the shots outside and my husband's
angry shouts indoors, but, to my surprise, she didn't say a word. I tried to tell her
that it wouldn't last, that soon we'd be able to go to the beach again, but she would
simply look away or ask for a book to read or a record to play. While hell gradually
put down roots, Sherine read and listened to music.
But, if you don't mind, I'd prefer not to dwell on that. I don't want to think about
the threats we received, about who was right, who was guilty and who was
innocent. The fact is that, a few months later, if you wanted to cross a particular
street, you had to catch a boat across to the island of Cyprus, get on another boat
and disembark on the other side of the street.
For nearly a year, we stayed pretty much shut up indoors, always hoping that the
situation would improve, always thinking it was a temporary thing, and that the
government would take control. One morning, while she was listening to a record
on her little portable record-player, Sherine started dancing and saying things like:
'This is going to last for a long, long time.'
I tried to stop her, but my husband grabbed my arm. I realised that he was listening
to what she was saying and taking it seriously. I never understood why, and we've
never spoken about it since. It's a kind of taboo between us.
The following day, he began taking unexpected steps, and two weeks later we were
on a boat bound for London. Later, we would learn that, although there are no
reliable statistics, during those years of civil war about 44,000 people died, 180,000
were wounded, and thousands made homeless. The fighting continued for other
reasons, the country was occupied by foreign troops, and the hell continues to this
day. 'It's going to last for a long, long time,' said Sherine. Unfortunately, she was
right.
Lukás Jessen-Petersen, 32, engineer, ex-husband
When I first met Athena, she already knew that she was adopted. She was just
nineteen and about to have a stand-up fight with a fellow student in the university
cafeteria because the fellow student, assuming Athena to be English (white skin,
straight hair, eyes that were sometimes green, sometimes grey), had made some
insulting remark about the Middle East.
It was the first day of term for these students and they knew nothing about each
other. But Athena got up, grabbed the other girl by the collar and started
screaming:
'Racist!'
I saw the look of terror in the girl's eyes and the look of excitement in the eyes of
the other students, eager to see what would happen next. I was in the year above,
and I knew exactly what the consequences would be: they would both be hauled
up before the vice-chancellor, an official complaint would be made, and that
would probably be followed by expulsion from the university and a possible police
inquiry into alleged racism, etc. etc. Everyone would lose.
'Shut up!' I yelled, without really knowing what I was saying.
I knew neither of the girls. I'm not the saviour of the world and, to be perfectly
honest, young people find the occasional fight stimulating, but I couldn't help
myself.
'Stop it!' I shouted again at the pretty young woman, who now had the other
equally pretty young woman by the throat. She shot me a furious glance. Then,
suddenly, something changed. She smiled, although she still had her hands around
her colleague's throat.
'You forgot to say “please”,' she said. Everyone laughed.
'Stop,' I asked again. 'Please.'
She released the other girl and came over to me. All heads turned to watch. 'You
have excellent manners. Do you also have a cigarette?'
I offered her my pack of cigarettes, and we went outside for a smoke. She had
gone from outrage to nonchalance, and minutes later, she was laughing, discussing
the weather, and asking if I liked this or that pop group. I heard the bell ringing for
class and solemnly ignored the rule I'd been brought up to obey all my life: do
your duty. I stayed there chatting, as if there were no university, no fights, no
canteens, no wind or cold or sun. There was only that young woman with the grey
eyes, saying the most boring and pointless things, but capable, nonetheless, of
holding my interest for the rest of my life.
Two hours later, we were having lunch together. Seven hours later, we were in a
bar, having supper and drinking whatever our limited budgets allowed us to eat and
drink. Our conversations grew ever more profound, and in a short space of time, I
knew practically everything about her life – Athena recounted details of her
childhood and adolescence with no prompting from me. Later, I realised she was
the same with everyone, but, that day, I felt like the most important man on the
face of the Earth.
She had come to London fleeing the civil war that had broken out in Lebanon.
Her father, a Maronite Christian (Editor's note: a branch of the Catholic Church,
which, although it comes under the authority of the Vatican, does not require
priests to be celibate and uses both Middle Eastern and Orthodox rituals), had
started to receive death threats because he worked for the Lebanese government,
but despite this, he couldn't make up his mind to leave and go into exile. Then
Athena, overhearing a phone conversation, decided that it was time she grew up,
that she assumed her filial responsibilities and protected those she loved.
She performed a kind of dance and pretended that she'd gone into a trance (she
had learned all about this kind of thing at school when she studied the lives of the
saints), and started making various pronouncements. I don't know how a mere
child could possibly persuade adults to make decisions based on what she said, but
that, according to Athena, was precisely what happened. Her father was very
superstitious, and she was convinced that she'd saved the lives of her family.
They arrived here as refugees, but not as beggars. The Lebanese community is
scattered all over the world, and her father soon found a way of re-establishing his
business, and life went on. Athena was able to study at good schools, she attended
dance classes – because dance was her passion – and when she'd finished at
secondary school, she chose to take a degree in engineering.
Once they were living in London, her parents invited her out to supper at one of
the most expensive restaurants in the city, and explained, very carefully, that she
had been adopted. Athena pretended to be surprised, hugged them both, and said
that nothing would change their relationship.
The truth was, though, that a friend of the family, in a moment of malice, had
called her 'an ungrateful orphan' and put her lack of manners down to the fact that
she was 'not her parents' “real” daughter'. She had hurled an ashtray at him cutting
his face, and then cried for two whole days, after which she quickly got used to the
idea that she was adopted. The malicious family friend was left with an
unexplained scar and took to saying that he'd been attacked in the street by
muggers.
I asked if she would like to go out with me the next day. She told me that she was
a virgin, went to church on Sundays, and had no interest in romantic novels – she
was more concerned with reading everything she could about the situation in the
Middle East.
She was, in short, busy. Very busy.
'People think that a woman's only dream is to get married and have children. And
given what I've told you, you probably think that I've suffered a lot in life. It's not
true, and, besides, I've been there already. I've known other men who wanted to
“protect” me from all those tragedies. What they forget is that, from Ancient
Greece on, the people who returned from battle were either dead on their shields
or stronger, despite or because of their scars. It's better that way: I've lived on a
battlefield since I was born, but I'm still alive and I don't need anyone to protect
me.'
She paused.
'You see how cultured I am?'
'Oh, very, but when you attack someone weaker than yourself, you make it look as
if you really do need protection. You could have ruined your university career right
there and then.'
'You're right. OK, I accept the invitation.'
We started seeing each other regularly, and the closer I got to her, the more I
discovered my own light, because she always encouraged me to give the best of
myself. She had never read any books on magic or esoterics. She said they were
things of the Devil, and that salvation was only possible through Jesus – end of
story. Sometimes, though, she said things that didn't seem entirely in keeping with
the teachings of the Church.
'Christ surrounded himself with beggars, prostitutes, tax-collectors and fishermen. I
think what he meant by this was that the divine spark is in every soul and is never
extinguished. When I sit still, or when I'm feeling very agitated, I feel as if I were
vibrating along with the whole Universe. And I know things then that I don't
know, as if God were guiding my steps. There are moments when I feel that
everything is being revealed to me.'
faith.
Then she would correct herself: 'But that's wrong.'
Athena always lived between two worlds: what she felt was true and what she had
been taught by her
One day, after almost a semester of equations, calculations and structural studies,
she announced that she was going to leave university.
'But you've never said anything to me about it!' I said.
'I was even afraid of talking about it to myself, but this morning I went to see my
hairdresser. She worked day and night so that her daughter could finish her
sociology degree. The daughter finally graduated and, after knocking on many
doors, found work as a secretary at a cement works. Yet even today, my
hairdresser said very proudly: “My daughter's got a degree.” Most of my parents'
friends and most of my parents' friends' children, also have degrees. This doesn't
mean that they've managed to find the kind of work they wanted. Not at all; they
went to university because someone, at a time when universities seemed important,
said that, in order to rise in the world, you had to have a degree. And thus the
world was deprived of some excellent gardeners, bakers, antique dealers, sculptors
and writers.'
I asked her to give it some more thought before taking such a radical step, but she
quoted these lines by Robert Frost:
Two roads diverged in a wood, and I I took the one less traveled by,
And that has made all the difference.
The following day, she didn't turn up for class. At our following meeting, I asked
what she was going to do.
'I'm going to get married and have a baby.'
This wasn't an ultimatum. I was twenty, she was nineteen, and I thought it was still
too early to take on such a commitment.
But Athena was quite serious. And I needed to choose between losing the one
thing that really filled my thoughts – my love for that woman – and losing my
freedom and all the choices that the future promised me.
To be honest, the decision was easy.
Father Giancarlo Fontana, 72
Of course I was surprised when the couple, both of them much too young, came
to the church to arrange the wedding ceremony. I hardly knew Lukás
Jessen-Petersen, but that same day, I learned that his family – obscure aristocrats
from Denmark – were totally opposed to the union. They weren't just against the
marriage, they were against the Church as well.
According to his father – who based himself on frankly unanswerable scientific
arguments – the Bible, on which the whole religion is based, wasn't really a book,
but a collage of sixty-six different manuscripts, the real name or identity of whose
authors is unknown; he said that almost a thousand years elapsed between the
writing of the first book and the last, longer than the time that has elapsed since
Columbus discovered America. And no living being on the planet – from monkeys
down to parrots – needs ten commandments in order to know how to behave. All
that it takes for the world to remain in harmony is for each being to follow the
laws of nature.
Naturally, I read the Bible and know a little of its history, but the human beings
who wrote it were instruments of Divine Power, and Jesus forged a far stronger
bond than the ten commandments: love. Birds and monkeys, or any of God's
creatures, obey their instincts and merely do what they're programmed to do. In
the case of the human being, things are more complicated because we know about
love and its traps.
Oh dear, here I am making a sermon, when I should be telling you about my
meeting with Athena and Lukás. While I was talking to the young man – and I say
talking, because we don't share the same faith, and I'm not, therefore, bound by
the secret of the confessional – I learned that, as well as the household's general
anticlericalism, there was a lot of resistance to Athena because she was a foreigner.
I felt like quoting from the Bible, from a part that isn't a profession of faith, but a
call to common sense:
'Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite, for he is thy brother; thou shalt not abhor an
Egyptian, because thou wast a stranger in his land.'
I'm sorry, there I am quoting the Bible again, and I promise I'll try to control
myself from now on. After talking to the young man, I spent at least two hours
with Sherine, or Athena as she preferred to be called.
Athena had always intrigued me. Ever since she first started coming to the church,
it seemed to me that she had one clear ambition: to become a saint. She told me –
although her fiancé didn't know this – that shortly before civil war broke out in
Beirut, she'd had an experience very similar to that of St Thérèse of Lisieux: she
had seen the streets running with blood. One could attribute this to some trauma
in childhood or adolescence, but the fact is that, to a greater or lesser extent, all
creative human beings have such experiences, which are known as 'possession by
the sacred'. Suddenly, for a fraction of a second, we feel that our whole life is
justified, our sins forgiven, and that love is still the strongest force, one that can
transform us forever.
But, at the same time, we feel afraid. Surrendering completely to love, be it human
or divine, means giving up everything, including our own well-being or our ability
to make decisions. It means loving in the deepest sense of the word. The truth is
that we don't want to be saved in the way God has chosen; we want to keep
absolute control over our every step, to be fully conscious of our decisions, to be
capable of choosing the object of our devotion.
It isn't like that with love – it arrives, moves in and starts directing everything. Only
very strong souls allow themselves to be swept along, and Athena was a strong
soul. So strong that she spent hours in deep contemplation. She had a special gift
for music; they say that she danced very well too, but since the church isn't really
the appropriate place for that, she used to bring her guitar each morning and
spend some time there singing to the Holy Virgin before going off to her classes.
I can still remember the first time I heard her. I'd just finished celebrating morning
mass with the few parishioners prepared to get up that early on a winter's morning,
when I realised that I'd forgotten to collect the money left in the offering box.
When I went back in, I heard some music that made me see everything differently,
as if the atmosphere had been touched by the hand of an angel. In one corner, in
a kind of ecstasy, a young woman of about twenty sat playing her guitar and
singing hymns of praise, with her eyes fixed on the statue of the Holy Virgin.
I went over to the offering box. She noticed my presence and stopped what she
was doing, but I nodded to her, encouraging her to go on. Then I sat down on
one of the pews, closed my eyes and listened.
At that moment, a sense of Paradise, of 'possession by the sacred', seemed to
descend from the heavens. As if she understood what was going on in my heart,
the young woman began to intersperse music with silence. Each time she stopped
playing, I would say a prayer. Then the music would start up again.
And I was conscious that I was experiencing something unforgettable, one of
those magical moments which we only understand when it has passed. I was
entirely in the present, with no past, no future, absorbed in experiencing the
morning, the music, the sweetness and the unexpected prayer. I entered a state of
worship and ecstasy and gratitude for being in the world, glad that I'd followed my
vocation despite my family's opposition. In the simplicity of that small chapel, in
the voice of that young woman, in the morning light flooding everything, I
understood once again that the grandeur of God reveals itself through simple
things.
After many tears on my part and after what seemed to me an eternity, the young
woman stopped playing. I turned round and realised that she was one of my
parishioners. After that, we became friends, and whenever we could, we shared in
that worship through music.
However, the idea of marriage took me completely by surprise. Since we knew
each other fairly well, I asked how she thought her husband's family would react.
'Badly, very badly.'
As tactfully as I could, I asked if, for any reason, she was being forced into
marriage. 'No, I'm still a virgin. I'm not pregnant.'
I asked if she'd told her own family, and she said that she had, and that their
reaction had been one of horror, accompanied by tears from her mother and
threats from her father.
'When I come here to praise the Virgin with my music, I'm not bothered about
what other people might think, I'm simply sharing my feelings with Her. And that's
how it's always been, ever since I was old enough to think for myself. I'm a vessel
in which the Divine Energy can make itself manifest. And that energy is asking me
now to have a child, so that I can give it what my birth mother never gave me:
protection and security.'
'No one is secure on this Earth,' I replied. She still had a long future ahead of her;
there was plenty of time for the miracle of creation to occur. However, Athena was
determined:
'St Thérèse didn't rebel against the illness that afflicted her, on the contrary, she
saw it as a sign of God's Glory. St Thérèse was only fifteen, much younger than
me, when she decided to enter a convent. She was forbidden to do so, but she
insisted. She decided to go and speak to the Pope himself – can you imagine? To
speak to the Pope! And she got what she wanted. That same Glory is asking
something far simpler and far more generous of me – to become a mother. If I
wait much longer, I won't be able to be a companion to my child, the age
difference will be too great, and we won't share the same interests.'
She wouldn't be alone in that, I said.
But Athena continued as if she wasn't listening:
'I'm only happy when I think that God exists and is listening to me; but that isn't
enough to go on living, when nothing seems to make sense. I pretend a happiness
I don't feel; I hide my sadness so as not to worry those who love me and care
about me. Recently, I've even considered suicide. At night, before I go to sleep, I
have long conversations with myself, praying for this idea to go away; it would be
such an act of ingratitude, an escape, a way of spreading tragedy and misery over
the Earth. In the mornings, I come here to talk to St Thérèse and to ask her to
free me from the demons I speak to at night. It's worked so far, but
I'm beginning to weaken. I know I have a mission which I've long rejected, and
now I must accept it. That mission is to be a mother. I must carry out that mission
or go mad. If I don't feel life growing inside me, I'll never be able to accept life
outside me.'
Lukás Jessen-Petersen, ex-husband
When Viorel was born, I had just turned twenty-two. I was no longer the student
who had married a fellow student, but a man responsible for supporting his family,
and with an enormous burden on my shoulders. My parents, who didn't even
come to the wedding, made any financial help conditional on my leaving Athena
and gaining custody of the child (or, rather, that's what my father said, because my
mother used to phone me up, weeping, saying I must be mad, but saying, too, how
much she'd like to hold her grandson in her arms). I hoped that, as they came to
understand my love for Athena and my determination to stay with her, their
resistance would gradually break down.
It didn't. And now I had to provide for my wife and child. I abandoned my studies
at the Engineering Faculty. I got a phone-call from my father, a mixture of stick
and carrot: he said that if I continued as I was, I'd end up being disinherited, but
that if I went back to university, he'd consider helping me, in his words,
'provisionally'. I refused. The romanticism of youth demands that we always take
very radical stances. I could, I said, solve my problems alone.
During the time before Viorel was born, Athena began helping me to understand
myself better. This didn't happen through sex – our sexual relationship was, I must
confess, very tentative – but through music.
As I later learned, music is as old as human beings. Our ancestors, who travelled
from cave to cave, couldn't carry many things, but modern archaeology shows
that, as well as the little they might have with them in the way of food, there was
always a musical instrument in their baggage, usually a drum. Music isn't just
something that comforts or distracts us, it goes beyond that – it's an ideology. You
can judge people by the kind of music they listen to.
As I watched Athena dance during her pregnancy and listened to her play the
guitar to calm the baby and make him feel that he was loved, I began to allow her
way of seeing the world to affect my life too. When Viorel was born, the first thing
we did when we brought him home was to play Albinoni's Adagio. When we
quarrelled, it was the force of music – although I can't make any logical connection
between the two things, except in some kind of hippyish way – that helped us get
through difficult times.
But all this romanticism didn't bring in the money. Since I played no instrument
and couldn't even offer my services as background music in a bar, I finally got a
job as a trainee with a firm of architects, doing structural calculations. They paid
me a very low hourly rate, and so I would leave the house very early each morning
and come home late. I hardly saw my son, who would be sleeping by then, and I
was almost too exhausted to talk or make love to my wife. Every night, I asked
myself: when will we be able to improve our financial situation and live in the style
we deserve? Although I largely agreed with Athena when she talked about the
pointlessness of having a degree, in engineering (and law and medicine, for
example), there are certain basic technical facts that are essential if we're not to put
people's lives at risk. And I'd been forced to interrupt my training in my chosen
profession, which meant abandoning a dream that was very important to me.
The rows began. Athena complained that I didn't pay enough attention to the
baby, that he needed a father, that if she'd simply wanted a child, she could have
done that on her own, without causing me all these problems. More than once, I
slammed out of the house, saying that she didn't understand me, and that I didn't
understand either how I'd ever agreed to the 'madness' of having a child at twenty,
before we had even a minimum of financial security. Gradually, out of sheer
exhaustion and irritation, we stopped making love.
I began to slide into depression, feeling that I'd been used and manipulated by the
woman I loved. Athena noticed my increasingly strange state of mind, but, instead
of helping me, she focused her energies on Viorel and on music. Work became my
escape. I would occasionally talk to my parents, and they would always say, as they
had so many times before, that she'd had the baby in order to get me to marry her.
She also became increasingly religious. She insisted on having our son baptised
with a name she herself had decided on – Viorel, a Romanian name. Apart from a
few immigrants, I doubt that anyone else in England is called Viorel, but I thought
it showed imagination on her part, and I realised, too, that she was making some
strange connection with a past she'd never known – her days in the orphanage in
Sibiu.
I tried to be adaptable, but I felt I was losing Athena because of the child. Our
arguments became more frequent, and she threatened to leave because she feared
that Viorel was picking up the 'negative energy' from our quarrels. One night, when
she made this threat again, I was the one who left, thinking that I'd go back as
soon as I'd calmed down a bit.
I started wandering aimlessly round London, cursing the life I'd chosen, the child
I'd agreed to have, and the wife who seemed to have no further interest in me. I
went into the first bar I came to, near a Tube station, and downed four glasses of
whisky. When the bar closed at eleven, I searched out one of those shops that stay
open all night, bought more whisky, sat down on a bench in a square and
continued drinking. A group of youths approached me and asked to share the
bottle with me. When I refused, they attacked me. The police arrived, and we were
all carted off to the police station.
I was released after making a statement. I didn't bring any charges, saying that it
had been nothing but a silly disagreement; after all, I didn't want to spend months
appearing at various courts, as the victim of an attack. I was still so drunk that, just
as I was about to leave, I stumbled and fell sprawling across an inspector's desk.
The inspector was angry, but instead of arresting me on the spot for insulting a
police officer, he threw me out into the street.
And there was one of my attackers, who thanked me for not taking the case any
further. He pointed out that I was covered in mud and blood and suggested I get a
change of clothes before returning home. Instead of going on my way, I asked
him to do me a favour: to listen to me, because I desperately needed to talk to
someone.
For an hour, he listened in silence to my woes. I wasn't really talking to him, but to
myself: a young man with his whole life before him, with a possibly brilliant career
ahead of him – as well as a family with the necessary contacts to open many doors
– but who now looked like a beggar – drunk, tired, depressed and penniless. And
all because of a woman who didn't even pay me any attention.
By the end of my story I had a clearer view of my situation: a life which I had
chosen in the belief that love conquers all. And it isn't true. Sometimes love carries
us into the abyss, taking with us, to make matters worse, the people we love. In my
case, I was well on the way to destroying not only my life, but Athena's and
Viorel's too.
At that moment, I said to myself once again that I was a man, not the boy who'd
been born with a silver spoon in his mouth, and that I'd faced with dignity all the
challenges that had been placed before me. Athena was already asleep, with the
baby in her arms. I took a bath, went outside again to throw my dirty clothes in
the bin, and lay down, feeling strangely sober.
The next day, I told Athena that I wanted a divorce. She asked me why.
'Because I love you. Because I love Viorel. And because all I've done is to blame
you both because I had to give up my dream of becoming an engineer. If we'd
waited a little, things would have been different, but you were only thinking about
your plans and forgot to include me in them.'
Athena said nothing, as if she had been expecting this, or as if she had
unconsciously been provoking such a response.
My heart was bleeding because I was hoping that she'd ask me, please, to stay. But
she seemed calm and resigned, concerned only that the baby might hear our
conversation. It was then that I felt sure she had never loved me, and that I had
merely been the instrument for the realisation of her mad dream to have a baby at
nineteen.
I told her that she could keep the house and the furniture, but she wouldn't hear
of it. She'd stay with her parents for a while, then look for a job and rent her own
apartment. She asked if I could help out financially with Viorel, and I agreed at
once.
I got up, gave her one last, long kiss and insisted again that she should stay in the
house, but she repeated her resolve to go to her parents' house as soon as she'd
packed up all her things. I stayed at a cheap hotel and waited every night for her to
phone me, asking me to come back and start a new life. I was even prepared to
continue the old life if necessary, because that separation had made me realise that
there was nothing and no one more important in the world than my wife and
child.
A week later, I finally got that call. All she said, however, was that she'd cleared out
all her things and wouldn't be going back. Two weeks after that, I learned that
she'd rented a small attic flat in Basset Road, where she had to carry the baby up
three flights of stairs every day. A few months later, we signed the divorce papers.
My real family left forever. And the family I'd been born into received me with
open arms.
After my separation from Athena and the great suffering that followed, I wondered
if I hadn't made a bad, irresponsible decision, typical of people who've read lots of
love stories in their adolescence and desperately want to repeat the tale of Romeo
and Juliet. When the pain abated – and time is the only cure for that – I saw that
life had allowed me to meet the one woman I would ever be capable of loving.
Each second spent by her side had been worthwhile, and given the chance, despite
all that had happened, I would do the same thing over again.
But time, as well as healing all wounds, taught me something strange too: that it's
possible to love more than one person in a lifetime. I remarried. I'm very happy
with my new wife, and I can't imagine living without her. This, however, doesn't
mean that I have to renounce all my past experiences, as long as I'm careful not to
compare my two lives. You can't measure love the way you can the length of a
road or the height of a building.
Something very important remained from my relationship with Athena: a son, her
great dream, of which she spoke so frankly before we decided to get married. I
have another child by my second wife, and I'm better prepared for all the highs
and lows of fatherhood than I was twelve years ago.
Once, when I went to fetch Viorel and bring him back to spend the weekend with
me, I decided to ask her why she'd reacted so calmly when I told her I wanted a
separation.
'Because all my life I've learned to suffer in silence,' she replied.
And only then did she put her arms around me and cry out all the tears she would
like to have shed on that day.
Father Giancarlo Fontana
I saw her when she arrived for Sunday mass, with the baby in her arms as usual. I
knew that she and Lukás were having difficulties, but, until that week, these had all
seemed merely the sort of misunderstandings that all couples have, and since both
of them were people who radiated goodness, I hoped that, sooner or later, they
would resolve their differences.
It had been a whole year since she last visited the church in the morning to play
her guitar and praise the Virgin. She devoted herself to looking after Viorel, whom
I had the honour to baptise, although I must admit I know of no saint with that
name. However, she still came to mass every Sunday, and we always talked
afterwards, when everyone else had left. She said I was her only friend. Together
we had shared in divine worship, now, though, it was her earthly problems she
needed to share with me.
She loved Lukás more than any man she had ever met; he was her son's father,
the person she had chosen to spend her life with, someone who had given up
everything and had courage enough to start a family. When the difficulties started,
she tried to convince him that it was just a phase, that she had to devote herself to
their son, but that she had no intention of turning Viorel into a spoiled brat. Soon
she would let him face certain of life's challenges alone. After that, she would go
back to being the wife and woman he'd known when they first met, possibly with
even more intensity, because now she had a better understanding of the duties and
responsibilities that came with the choice she'd made. Lukás still felt rejected; she
tried desperately to divide herself between her husband and her child, but she was
always obliged to choose, and when that happened, she never hesitated: she chose
Viorel.
Drawing on my scant knowledge of psychology, I said that this wasn't the first time
I'd heard such a story, and that in such situations men do tend to feel rejected, but
that it soon passes. I'd heard about similar problems in conversations with my
other parishioners. During one of our talks, Athena acknowledged that she had
perhaps been rather precipitate; the romance of being a young mother had blinded
her to the real challenges that arise after the birth of a child. But it was too late
now for regrets.
She asked if I could talk to Lukás, who never came to church, perhaps because he
didn't believe in God or perhaps because he preferred to spend his Sunday
mornings with his son. I agreed to do so, as long as he came of his own accord.
Just when Athena was about to ask him this favour, the major crisis occurred, and
he left her and Viorel.
I advised her to be patient, but she was deeply hurt. She'd been abandoned once
in childhood, and all the hatred she felt for her birth mother was automatically
transferred to Lukás, although later, I understand, they became good friends again.
For Athena, breaking family ties was possibly the gravest sin anyone could
commit.
She continued attending church on Sundays, but always went straight back home
afterwards. She had no one now with whom to leave her son, who cried lustily
throughout mass, disturbing everyone else'sconcentration. On one of the rare
occasions when we could speak, she said that she was working for a bank, had
rented an apartment, and that I needn't worry about her. Viorel's father (she never
mentioned her husband's name now) was fulfilling his financial obligations.
Then came that fateful Sunday.
I learned what had happened during the week – one of the parishioners told me. I
spent several nights praying for an angel to bring me inspiration and tell me
whether I should keep my commitment to the Church or to flesh-and-blood men
and women. When no angel appeared, I contacted my superior, and he said that
the only reason the Church has survived is because it's always been rigid about
dogma, and if it started making exceptions, we'd be back in the Middle Ages. I
knew exactly what was going to happen. I thought of phoning Athena, but she
hadn't given me her new number.
That morning, my hands were trembling as I lifted up the host and blessed the
bread. I spoke the words that had come down to me through a thousand-year-old
tradition, using the power passed on from generation to generation by the
apostles. But then my thoughts turned to that young woman with her child in her
arms, a kind of Virgin Mary, the miracle of motherhood and love made manifest in
abandonment and solitude, and who had just joined the line as she always did, and
was slowly approaching in order to take communion.
I think most of the congregation knew what was happening. And they were all
watching me, waiting for my reaction. I saw myself surrounded by the just, by
sinners, by Pharisees, by members of the Sanhedrin, by apostles and disciples and
people with good intentions and bad.
Athena stood before me and repeated the usual gesture: she closed her eyes and
opened her mouth to receive the Body of Christ.
The Body of Christ remained in my hands.
She opened her eyes, unable to understand what was going on. 'We'll talk later,' I
whispered.
But she didn't move.
'There are people behind you in the queue. We'll talk later.'
'What's going on?' she asked, and everyone in the line could hear her question.
'We'll talk later.'
'Why won't you give me communion? Can't you see you're humiliating me in front
of everyone? Haven't I been through enough already?'
'Athena, the Church forbids divorced people from receiving the sacrament. You
signed your divorce papers this week. We'll talk later,' I said again.
When she still didn't move, I beckoned to the person behind her to come forward.
I continued giving communion until the last parishioner had received it. And it was
then, just before I turned to the altar, that I heard that voice.
It was no longer the voice of the girl who sang her worship of the Virgin Mary,
who talked about her plans, who was so moved when she shared with me what
she'd learned about the lives of the saints, and who almost wept when she spoke
to me about her marital problems. It was the voice of a wounded, humiliated
animal, its heart full of loathing.
'A curse on this place!' said the voice. 'A curse on all those who never listened to
the words of Christ and who have transformed his message into a stone building.
For Christ said: “Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest.” Well, I'm heavy laden, and they won't let me come to Him. Today
I've learned that the Church has changed those words to read: “Come unto me all
ye who follow our rules, and let the heavy laden go hang!”'
I heard one of the women in the front row of pews telling her to be quiet. But I
wanted to hear. I needed to hear. I turned to her, my head bowed – it was all I
could do.
'I swear that I will never set foot in a church ever again. Once more, I've been
abandoned by a family, and this time it has nothing to do with financial difficulties
or with the immaturity of those who marry too young. A curse upon all those who
slam the door in the face of a mother and her child! You're just like those people
who refused to take in the Holy Family, like those who denied Christ when he
most needed a friend!'
With that, she turned and left in tears, her baby in her arms. I finished the service,
gave the final blessing and went straight to the sacristy – that Sunday, there would
be no mingling with the faithful, no pointless conversations. That Sunday, I was
faced by a philosophical dilemma: I had chosen to respect the institution rather
than the words on which that institution was based.
I'm getting old now, and God could take me at any moment. I've remained faithful
to my religion and I believe that, for all its errors, it really is trying to put things
right. This will take decades, possibly centuries, but one day, all that will matter is
love and Christ's words: 'Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest.' I've devoted my entire life to the priesthood and I don't regret
my decision for one second. However, there are times, like that Sunday, when,
although I didn't doubt my faith, I did doubt men.
I know now what happened to Athena, and I wonder: Did it all start there, or was
it already in her soul? I think of the many Athenas and Lukáses in the world who
are divorced and because of that can no longer receive the sacrament of the
Eucharist; all they can do is contemplate the suffering, crucified Christ and listen to
His words, words that are not always in accord with the laws of the Vatican. In a
few cases, these people leave the church, but the majority continue coming to
mass on Sundays, because that's what they're used to, even though they know that
the miracle of the transmutation of the bread and the wine into the flesh and the
blood of the Lord is forbidden to them.
I like to imagine that, when she left the church, Athena met Jesus. Weeping and
confused, she would have thrown herself into his arms, asking him to explain why
she was being excluded just because of a piece of paper she'd signed, something of
no importance on the spiritual plane, and which was of interest only to registry
offices and the tax man.
And looking at Athena, Jesus might have replied:
'My child, I've been excluded too. It's a very long time since they've allowed me in
there.'
Pavel Podbielski, 57, owner of the apartment
Athena and I had one thing in common: we were both refugees from a war and
arrived in England when we were still children, although I fled Poland over fifty
years ago. We both knew that, despite that physical change, our traditions continue
to exist in exile – communities join together again, language and religion remain
alive, and in a place that will always be foreign to them, people tend to look after
each other.
Traditions continue, but the desire to go back gradually disappears. That desire
needs to stay alive in our hearts as a hope with which we like to delude ourselves,
but it will never be put into practice; I'll never go back to live in Czêstochowa, and
Athena and her family will never return to Beirut.
It was this kind of solidarity that made me rent her the third floor of my house in
Basset Road normally, I'd prefer tenants without children. I'd made that mistake
before, and two things had happened: I complained about the noise they made
during the day, and they complained about the noise I made during the night. Both
noises had their roots in sacred elements – crying and music – but they belonged
to two completely different worlds and it was hard for them to coexist.
I warned her, but she didn't really take it in, and told me not to worry about her
son. He spent all day at his grandmother's house anyway, and the apartment was
conveniently close to her work at a local bank.
Despite my warnings, and despite holding out bravely at first, eight days later the
doorbell rang. It was Athena, with her child in her arms.
'My son can't sleep. Couldn't you turn the music down at least for one night?'
Everyone in the room stared at her.
'What's going on?'
The child immediately stopped crying, as if he were as surprised as his mother to
see that group of people, who had stopped in mid-dance.
I pressed the pause button on the cassette player and beckoned her in. Then I
restarted the music so as not to interrupt the ritual. Athena sat down in one corner
of the room, rocking her child in her arms and watching him drift off to sleep
despite the noise of drums and brass. She stayed for the whole ceremony and left
along with the other guests, but – as I thought she would – she rang my doorbell
the next morning, before going to work.
'You don't have to explain what I saw – people dancing with their eyes closed –
because I know what that means. I often do the same myself, and at the moment,
those are the only times of peace and serenity in my life. Before I became a
mother, I used to go to clubs with my husband and my friends, and I'd see people
dancing with their eyes closed there too. Some were just trying to look cool, and
others seemed to be genuinely moved by a greater, more powerful force. And ever
since I've been old enough to think for myself, I've always used dance as a way of
getting in touch with something stronger and more powerful than myself. Anyway,
could you tell me what that music was?'
'What are you doing this Sunday?'
'Nothing special. I might go for a walk with Viorel in Regent's Park and get some
fresh air. I'll have plenty of time later on for a social calendar of my own; for the
moment, I've decided to follow my son's.' 'I'll come with you, if you like.'
On the two nights before our walk, Athena came to watch the ritual. Her son fell
asleep after only a few minutes, and she merely watched what was going on around
her without saying a word. She sat quite still on the sofa, but I was sure that her
soul was dancing.
On Sunday afternoon, while we were walking in the park, I asked her to pay
attention to everything she was seeing and hearing: the leaves moving in the
breeze, the waves on the lake, the birds singing, the dogs barking, the shouts of
children as they ran back and forth, as if obeying some strange logic,
incomprehensible to grown-ups.
'Everything moves, and everything moves to a rhythm. And everything that moves
to a rhythm creates a sound. At this moment, the same thing is happening here
and everywhere else in the world. Our ancestors noticed the same thing when they
tried to escape from the cold into caves: things moved and made noise. The first
human beings may have been frightened by this at first, but that fear was soon
replaced by a sense of awe: they understood that this was the way in which some
Superior Being was communicating with them. In the hope of reciprocating that
communication, they started imitating the sounds and movements around them –
and thus dance and music were born. A few days ago, you told me that dance puts
you in touch with something stronger than yourself.'
'Yes, when I dance, I'm a free woman, or, rather, a free spirit who can travel
through the universe, contemplate the present, divine the future, and be
transformed into pure energy. And that gives me enormous pleasure, a joy that
always goes far beyond everything I've experienced or will experience in my
lifetime. There was a time when I was determined to become a saint, praising God
through music and movement, but that path is closed to me forever now.'
'Which path do you mean?'
She made her son more comfortable in his pushchair. I saw that she didn't want to
answer that question and so I asked again: when mouths close, it's because there's
something important to be said.
Without a flicker of emotion, as if she'd always had to endure in silence the things
life imposed on her, she told me about what had happened at the church, when
the priest – possibly her only friend – had refused her communion. She also told
me about the curse she had uttered then, and that she had left the Catholic Church
forever.
'A saint is someone who lives his or her life with dignity,' I explained. 'All we have
to do is understand that we're all here for a reason and to commit ourselves to
that. Then we can laugh at our sufferings, large and small, and walk fearlessly,
aware that each step has meaning. We can let ourselves be guided by the light
emanating from the Vertex.'
'What do you mean by the Vertex? In mathematics, it's the topmost angle of a
triangle.'
'In life, too, it's the culminating point, the goal of all those who, like everyone else,
make mistakes, but who, even in their darkest moments, never lose sight of the
light emanating from their hearts. That's what we're trying to do in our group. The
Vertex is hidden inside us, and we can reach it if we accept it and recognise its
light.'
I explained that I'd come up with the name 'the search for the Vertex' for the
dance she'd watched on previous nights, performed by people of all ages (at the
time there were ten of us, aged between nineteen and sixty-five). Athena asked
where I'd found out about it.
I told her that, immediately after the end of the Second World War, some of my
family had managed to escape from the Communist regime that was taking over
Poland, and decided to move to England. They'd been advised to bring with them
art objects and antiquarian books, which, they were told, were highly valued in this
part of the world.
Paintings and sculptures were quickly sold, but the books remained, gathering dust.
My mother was keen for me to read and speak Polish, and the books formed part
of my education. One day, inside a nineteenth-century edition of Thomas Malthus,
I found two pages of notes written by my grandfather, who had died in a
concentration camp. I started reading, assuming it would be something to do with
an inheritance or else a passionate letter intended for a secret lover, because it was
said that he'd fallen in love with someone in Russia.
There was, in fact, some truth in this. The pages contained a description of his
journey to Siberia during the Communist revolution. There, in the remote village of
Diedov, he fell in love with an actress. (Editor's note: It has not been possible to
locate this village on the map. The name may have been deliberately changed, or
the place itself may have disappeared after Stalin'sforced migrations.) According to
my grandfather, the actress was part of a sect, who believed that they had found
the remedy for all ills through a particular kind of dance, because the dance
brought the dancer into contact with the light from the Vertex.
They feared that the tradition would disappear; the inhabitants of the village were
soon to be transported to another place. Both the actress and her friends begged
him to write down what they had learned. He did, but clearly didn't think it was of
much importance, because he left his notes inside a book, and there they remained
until the day I found them.
Athena broke in:
'But dance isn't something you write about, you have to do it.'
'Exactly. All the notes say is this: Dance to the point of exhaustion, as if you were
a mountaineer climbing a hill, a sacred mountain. Dance until you are so out of
breath that your organism is forced to obtain oxygen some other way, and it is
that, in the end, which will cause you to lose your identity and your relationship
with space and time. Dance only to the sound of percussion; repeat the process
every day; know that, at a certain moment, your eyes will, quite naturally, close, and
you will begin to see a light that comes from within, a light that answers your
questions and develops your hidden powers.'
'Have you developed some special power?'
Instead of replying, I suggested that she join our group, since her son seemed
perfectly at ease even when the noise of the cymbals and the other percussion
instruments was at its loudest. The following day, at the usual time, she was there
for the start of the session. I introduced her to my friends, explaining that she was
my upstairs neighbour. No one said anything about their lives or asked her what
she did. When the moment came, I turned on the music and we began to dance.
She started dancing with the child in her arms, but he soon fell asleep, and she put
him down on the sofa. Before I closed my eyes and went into a trance, I saw that
she had understood exactly what I meant by the path of the Vertex.
Every day, except Sunday, she was there with the child. We would exchange a few
words of welcome, then I would put on the music a friend of mine had brought
from the Russian steppes, and we would all dance to the point of exhaustion. After
a month of this, she asked me for a copy of the tape.
'I'd like to do the dancing in the morning, before I leave Viorel at my Mum's house
and go to work.' I tried to dissuade her.
'I don't know, I think a group that's connected by the same energy creates a kind
of aura that helps everyone get into the trance state. Besides, doing the dancing
before you go to work is just asking to get the sack, because you'll be exhausted all
day.'
Athena thought for a moment, then said:
'You're absolutely right when you talk about collective energy. In your group, for
example, there are four couples and your wife. All of them have found love. That's
why they can share such a positive vibration with me. But I'm on my own, or,
rather, I'm with my son, but he can't yet manifest his love in a way we can
understand. So I'd prefer to accept my loneliness. If I try to run away from it now,
I'll never find a partner again. If I accept it, rather than fight against it, things might
change. I've noticed that loneliness gets stronger when we try to face it down, but
gets weaker when we simply ignore it.'
'Did you join our group in search of love?'
'That would be a perfectly good reason, I think, but the answer is “No”. I came in
search of a meaning for my life, because, at present, its only meaning is my son,
Viorel, and I'm afraid I might end up destroying him, either by being
over-protective or by projecting onto him the dreams I've never managed to
realise. Then one night, while I was dancing, I felt that I'd been cured. If we were
talking about some physical ailment, we'd probably call it a miracle, but it was a
spiritual malaise that was making me unhappy, and suddenly it vanished.'
I knew what she meant.
'No one taught me to dance to the sound of that music,' Athena went on, 'but I
have a feeling I know what I'm doing.'
'It's not something you have to learn. Remember our walk in the park and what we
saw there? Nature creating its own rhythms and adapting itself to each moment.'
'No one taught me how to love either, but I loved God, I loved my husband, I
love my son and my family. And yet still there's something missing. Although I get
tired when I'm dancing, when I stop, I seem to be in a state of grace, of profound
ecstasy. I want that ecstasy to last throughout the day and for it to help me find
what I lack: the love of a man. I can see the heart of that man while I'm dancing,
but not his face. I sense that he's close by, which is why I need to remain alert. I
need to dance in the morning so that I can spend the rest of the day paying
attention to everything that's going on around me.'
'Do you know what the word “ecstasy” means? It comes from the Greek and
means, “to stand outside yourself”. Spending the whole day outside yourself is
asking too much of body and soul.'
'I'd like to try anyway.'
I saw that there was no point arguing and so I made her a copy of the tape. And
from then on, I woke every morning to the sound of music and dancing upstairs,
and I wondered how she could face her work at the bank after almost an hour of
being in a trance. When we bumped into each other in the corridor, I suggested
she come in for a coffee, and she told me that she'd made more copies of the tape
and that many of her work colleagues were also now looking for the Vertex.
'Did I do wrong? Was it a secret?'
Of course it wasn't. On the contrary, she was helping me preserve a tradition that
was almost lost. According to my grandfather's notes, one of the women said that
a monk who visited the region had once told them that each of us contains our
ancestors and all the generations to come. When we free ourselves, we are freeing
all humanity.
'So all the men and women in that village in Siberia must be here now and very
happy too. Their work is being reborn in this world, thanks to your grandfather.
There's one thing I'd like to ask you: what made you decide to dance after you read
those notes? If you'd read something about sport instead, would you have decided
to become a footballer?'
This was a question no one had ever asked me.
'Because, at the time, I was ill. I was suffering from a rare form of arthritis, and the
doctors told me that I should prepare myself for life in a wheelchair by the age of
thirty-five. I saw that I didn't have much time ahead of me and so I decided to
devote myself to something I wouldn't be able to do later on. My grandfather had
written on one of those small sheets of paper that the inhabitants of Diedov
believed in the curative powers of trances.'
'And it seems they were right.'
I didn't say anything, but I wasn't so sure. Perhaps the doctors were wrong.
Perhaps the fact of being from an immigrant family, unable to allow myself the
luxury of being ill, acted with such force upon my unconscious mind that it
provoked a natural reaction in my body. Or perhaps it really was a miracle,
although that went totally against what my Catholic faith preaches: dance is not a
cure.
I remember that, as an adolescent, I had no idea what the right music would sound
like, and so I used to put on a black hood and imagine that everything around me
had ceased to exist: my spirit would travel to Diedov, to be with those men and
women, with my grandfather and his beloved actress. In the silence of my
bedroom, I would ask them to teach me to dance, to go beyond my limits, because
soon I would be paralysed forever. The more my body moved, the more brightly
the light in my heart shone, and the more I learned – perhaps on my own, perhaps
from the ghosts of the past. I even imagined the music they must have listened to
during their rituals, and when a friend visited Siberia many years later, I asked him
to bring me back some records. To my surprise, one of them was very similar to
the music I had imagined would accompany the dancing in Diedov.
It was best to say nothing of all this to Athena; she was easily influenced and, I
thought, slightly unstable.
'Perhaps what you're doing is right,' was all I said.
We talked again, shortly before her trip to the Middle East. She seemed contented,
as if she'd found everything she wanted: love.
'My colleagues at work have formed a group, and they call themselves “the Pilgrims
of the Vertex”. And all thanks to your grandfather.'
'All thanks to you, you mean, because you felt the need to share the dance with
others. I know you're leaving, but I'd like to thank you for giving another
dimension to what I've been doing all these years in trying to spread the light to a
few interested people, but always very tentatively, always afraid people might find
the whole story ridiculous.'
'Do you know what I've learned? That although ecstasy is the ability to stand
outside yourself, dance is a way of rising up into space, of discovering new
dimensions while still remaining in touch with your body. When you dance, the
spiritual world and the real world manage to coexist quite happily. I think classical
dancers dance on pointes because they're simultaneously touching the earth and
reaching up to the skies.'
As far as I can remember, those were her last words to me. During any dance to
which we surrender with joy, the brain loses its controlling power, and the heart
takes up the reins of the body. Only at that moment does the Vertex appear. As
long as we believe in it, of course.
Peter Sherney, 47, manager of a branch of [name of Bank omitted] in
Holland Park, London
I only took on Athena because her family was one of our most important
customers; after all, the world revolves around mutual interests. She seemed a very
restless person, and so I gave her a dull clerical post, hoping that she would soon
resign. That way, I could tell her father that I'd done my best to help her, but
without success.
My experience as a manager had taught me to recognise people's states of mind,
even if they said nothing. On a management course I attended, we learned that if
you wanted to get rid of someone, you should do everything you can to provoke
them into rudeness, so that you would then have a perfectly good reason to
dismiss them.
I did everything I could to achieve my objective with Athena. She didn't depend on
her salary to live and would soon learn how pointless it was: having to get up early,
drop her son off at her mother's house, slave away all day at a repetitive job, pick
her son up again, go to the supermarket, spend time with her son before putting
him to bed, and then, the next day, spend another three hours on public transport,
and all for no reason, when there were so many other more interesting ways of
filling her days. She grew increasingly irritable, and I felt proud of my strategy. I
would get what I wanted. She started complaining about the apartment where she
lived, saying that her landlord kept her awake all night, playing really loud music.
Then, suddenly, something changed. At first, it was only Athena, but soon it was
the whole branch. How did I notice this change? Well, a group of workers is like a
kind of orchestra; a good manager is the conductor, and he knows who is out of
tune, who is playing with real commitment, and who is simply following the crowd.
Athena seemed to be playing her instrument without the least enthusiasm; she
seemed distant, never sharing the joys and sadnesses of her personal life with her
colleagues, letting it be known that, when she left work, her free time was entirely
taken up with looking after her son. Then, suddenly, she became more relaxed,
more communicative, telling anyone who would listen that she had discovered the
secret of rejuvenation.
'Rejuvenation', of course, is a magic word. Coming from someone who was barely
twenty-one, it sounded pretty ridiculous, and yet other members of staff believed
her and started to ask her for the secret formula.
Her efficiency increased, even though her workload remained unchanged. Her
colleagues, who, up until then, had never exchanged more than a 'Good morning'
or a 'Goodnight' with her, started asking her out to lunch. When they came back,
they seemed very pleased, and the department's productivity made a giant leap.
I know that people who are in love do have an effect on the environment in
which they live, and so I immediately assumed that Athena must have met
someone very important in her life.
I asked, and she agreed, adding that she'd never before gone out with a customer,
but that, in this case, she'd been unable to refuse. Normally, this would have been
grounds for immediate dismissal – the bank's rules are clear: personal contact with
customers is forbidden. But, by then, I was aware that her behaviour had infected
almost everyone else. Some of her colleagues started getting together with her after
work, and a few of them had, I believe, been to her house.
I had a very dangerous situation on my hands. The young trainee with no previous
work experience, who up until then had seemed to veer between shyness and
aggression, had become a kind of natural leader amongst my workers. If I fired
her, they would think it was out ofjealousy, and I'd lose their respect. If I kept her
on, I ran the risk, within a matter of months, of losing control of the group.
I decided to wait a little, but meanwhile, there was a definite increase in the 'energy'
at the bank (I hate that word 'energy', because it doesn't really mean anything,
unless you're talking about electricity). Anyway, our customers seemed much
happier and were starting to recommend other people to come to us. The
employees seemed happy too, and even though their workload had doubled, I
didn't need to take on any more staff because they were all coping fine.
One day, I received a letter from my superiors. They wanted me to go to
Barcelona for a group meeting, so that I could explain my management techniques
to them. According to them, I had increased profit without increasing expenditure,
and that, of course, is the only thing that interests executives everywhere.
But what techniques?
At least I knew where it had all started, and so I summoned Athena to my office. I
complimented her on her excellent productivity levels, and she thanked me with a
smile.
I proceeded cautiously, not wishing to be misinterpreted.
'And how's your boyfriend? I've always found that anyone who is loved has more
love to give. What does he do?'
'He works for Scotland Yard.' (Editor's note: Police investigation department linked
to London's Metropolitan Police.)
I preferred not to ask any further questions, but I needed to keep the conversation
going and I didn't have much time.
'I've noticed a great change in you and–' 'Have you noticed a change in the bank
too?'
How to respond to a question like that? On the one hand, I would be giving her
more power than was advisable, and on the other, if I wasn't straight with her, I
would never get the answers I needed.
'Yes, I've noticed a big change, and I'm thinking of promoting you.'
'I need to travel. I'd like to get out of London and discover new horizons.'
Travel? Just when everything was going so well in my branch, she wanted to leave?
Although, when I thought about it, wasn't that precisely the way out I needed and
wanted?
'I can help the bank if you give me more responsibility,' she went on.
Yes, she was giving me an excellent opportunity. Why hadn't I thought of that
before? 'Travel' meant getting rid of her and resuming my leadership of the group
without having to deal with the fall-out from a dismissal or a rebellion. But I
needed to ponder the matter, because rather than her helping the bank, I needed
her to help me. Now that my superiors had noticed an increase in productivity, I
knew that I would have to keep it up or risk losing prestige and end up worse off
than before. Sometimes I understand why most of my colleagues don't do very
much in order to improve: if they don't succeed, they're called incompetent. If they
do succeed, they have to keep improving all the time, a situation guaranteed to
bring on an early heart attack.
I took the next step very cautiously: it's not a good idea to frighten the person in
possession of a secret before she's revealed that secret to you; it's best to pretend
to grant her request.
'I'll bring your request to the attention of my superiors. In fact, I'm having a
meeting with them in Barcelona, which is why I called you in. Would it be true to
say that our performance has improved since, shall we say, the other employees
began getting on better with you?'
'Or shall we say, began getting on better with themselves?' 'Yes, but encouraged by
you – or am I wrong?'
'You know perfectly well that you're not.'
'Have you been reading some book on management I don't know about?'
'I don't read that kind of book, but I would like a promise from you that you really
will consider my request.'
I thought of her boyfriend at Scotland Yard. If I made a promise and failed to
keep it, would I be the object of some reprisal? Could he have taught her some
cutting-edge technology that enables one to achieve impossible results?
'I'll tell you everything, even if you don't keep your promise, but I can't guarantee
that you'll get the same results if you don't practise what I teach.'
'You mean the “rejuvenation technique”?' 'Exactly.'
'Wouldn't it be enough just to know the theory?'
'Possibly. The person who taught me learned about it from a few sheets of paper.'
I was glad she wasn't forcing me to make decisions that went beyond my
capabilities or my principles. But I must confess that I had a personal interest in
that whole story, because I, too, dreamed of finding some way of 'recycling' my
potential. I promised that I'd do what I could, and Athena began to describe the
long, esoteric dance she performed in search of the so-called Vertex (or was it
Axis, I can't quite remember now). As we talked, I tried to set down her mad
thoughts in objective terms. An hour proved not to be enough, and so I asked her
to come back the following day, and together we would prepare the report to be
presented to the bank's board of directors. At one point in our conversation, she
said with a smile:
'Don't worry about describing the technique in the same terms we've been using
here. I reckon even a bank's board of directors are people like us, made of flesh
and blood, and interested in unconventional methods.'
Athena was completely wrong. In England, tradition always speaks louder than
innovation. But why not take a risk, as long as it didn't endanger my job? The
whole thing seemed absurd to me, but I had to summarise it and put it in a way
that everyone could understand. That was all.
Before I presented my 'paper' in Barcelona, I spent the whole morning repeating
to myself: 'My' process is producing results, and that's all that matters. I read a few
books on the subject and learned that in order to present a new idea with the
maximum impact, you should structure your talk in an equally provocative way,
and so the first thing I said to the executives gathered in that luxury hotel were
these words of St Paul: 'God hid the most important things from the wise because
they cannot understand what is simple.' (Editor's note: It is impossible to know
here whether he is referring to a verse from Matthew 11: 25: 'I thank thee, O
Father, thou hast hid these thingsfrom the wise andprudent, and hast revealed
them unto babes', orfrom St Paul (1 Corinthians 1: 27): 'But God hath chosen the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God hath chosen the weak
things of the world to confound the things which are mighty. ')
When I said this, the whole audience, who had spent the last two days analysing
graphs and statistics, fell silent. It occurred to me that I had almost certainly lost
my job, but I carried on. Firstly, because I had researched the subject and was sure
of what I was saying and deserved credit for this. Secondly, because although, at
certain points, I was obliged to omit any mention of Athena's enormous influence
on the whole process, I was, nevertheless, not lying.
'I have learned that, in order to motivate employees nowadays, you need more
than just the training provided by our own excellent training centres. Each of us
contains something within us which is unknown, but which, when it surfaces, is
capable of producing miracles.
'We all work for some reason: to feed our children, to earn money to support
ourselves, to justify our life, to get a little bit of power. However, there are always
tedious stages in that process, and the secret lies in transforming those stages into
an encounter with ourselves or with something higher.
'For example, the search for beauty isn't always associated with anything practical
and yet we still search for it as if it were the most important thing in the world.
Birds learn to sing, but not because it will help them find food, avoid predators or
drive away parasites. Birds sing, according to Darwin, because that is the only way
they have of attracting a partner and perpetuating the species.'
I was interrupted by an executive from Geneva, who called for a more objective
presentation. However, to my delight, the Director-General asked me to go on.
'Again according to Darwin, who wrote a book that changed the course of all
humanity (Editor's note: The Origin of Species, 1859, in which he first posited that
human beings evolvedfrom a type of ape), those who manage to arouse passions
are repeating something that has been going on since the days we lived in caves,
where rituals for courting a partner were fundamental for the survival and
evolution of the human species. Now, what difference is there between the
evolution of the human race and that of the branch of a bank? None. Both obey
the same laws – only the fittest survive and evolve.'
At this point, I was obliged to admit that I'd developed this idea thanks to the
spontaneous collaboration of one of my employees, Sherine Khalil.
'Sherine, who likes to be known as Athena, brought into the workplace a new kind
of emotion passion. Yes, passion, something we never normally consider when
discussing loans or spreadsheets. My employees started using music as a stimulus
for dealing more efficiently with their clients.'
Another executive interrupted, saying that this was an old idea: supermarkets did
the same thing, using piped music to encourage their customers to buy more.
'I'm not saying that we used music in the workplace. People simply started living
differently because Sherine, or Athena if you prefer, taught them to dance before
facing their daily tasks. I don't know precisely what mechanism this awakens in
people; as a manager, I'm only responsible for the results, not for the process. I
myself didn't participate in the dancing, but I understand that, through dance, they
all felt more connected with what they were doing.
'We were born and brought up with the maxim: Time is money. We know exactly
what money is, but what does the word “time” mean? The day is made up of
twenty-four hours and an infinite number of moments. We need to be aware of
each of those moments and to make the most of them regardless of whether we're
busy doing something or merely contemplating life. If we slow down, everything
lasts much longer. Of course, that means that washing the dishes might last longer,
as might totting up the debits and credits on a balance sheet or checking
promissory notes, but why not use that time to think about pleasant things and to
feel glad simply to be alive?'
The Director-General was looking at me in surprise. I was sure he wanted me to
explain in detail what I'd learned, but some of those present were beginning to
grow restless.
'I understand exactly what you mean,' he said. 'I understand, too, that your
employees worked with more enthusiasm because they were able to enjoy one
moment in the day when they came into full contact with themselves. And I'd like
to compliment you on being flexible enough to allow such unorthodox practices,
which are, it must be said, producing excellent results. However, speaking of time,
this is a conference, and you have only five minutes to conclude your
presentation. Could you possibly try to list the main points which would allow us
to apply these principles in other branches?'
He was right. This was fine for the employees, but it could prove fatal to my
career, and so I decided to summarise the points Sherine and I had written
together.
'Basing ourselves on personal observations, Sherine Khalil and I developed certain
points which I would be delighted to discuss with anyone who's interested. Here
are the main ones:
'(a) We all have an unknown ability, which will probably remain unknown forever.
And yet that ability can become our ally. Since it's impossible to measure that
ability or give it an economic value, it's never taken seriously, but I'm speaking
here to other human beings and I'm sure you understand what I mean, at least in
theory.
'(b) At my branch, employees have learned how to tap into that ability through a
dance based on a rhythm which comes, I believe, from the desert regions of Asia.
However, its place of origin is irrelevant, as long as people can express through
their bodies what their souls are trying to say. I realise that the word “soul” might
be misunderstood, so I suggest we use the word “intuition” instead. And if that
word is equally hard to swallow, then let's use the term “primary emotions”, which
sounds more scientific, although, in fact, it has rather less meaning than the other
two words.
'(c) Before going to work, instead of encouraging my employees to do keep-fit or
aerobics, I get them to dance for at least an hour. This stimulates the body and the
mind; they start the day demanding a certain degree of creativity from themselves
and channel that accumulated energy into their work at the bank.
'(d) Customers and employees live in the same world: reality is nothing but a series
of electrical stimuli to the brain. What we think we “see” is a pulse of energy to a
completely dark part of the brain. However, if we get on the same wavelength with
other people, we can try to change that reality. In some way which I don't
understand, joy is infectious, as is enthusiasm and love. Or indeed sadness,
depression or hatred – things which can be picked up “intuitively” by customers
and other employees. In order to improve performance, we have to create
mechanisms that keep these positive stimuli alive.'
'How very esoteric,' commented a woman who managed investment funds at a
branch in Canada. I slightly lost confidence. I had failed to convince anyone.
Nevertheless, I pretended to ignore her remark and, using all my creativity, sought
to give my paper a practical conclusion:
'The bank should earmark a fund to do research into how this infectious state of
mind works, and thus noticeably increase our profits.'
This seemed a reasonably satisfactory ending, and so I preferred not to use the
two minutes remaining to me. When I finished the seminar, at the end of an
exhausting day, the Director-General asked me to have supper with him, and he
did so is front of all our other colleagues, as if he were trying to show that he
supported everything I'd said. I had never before had an opportunity to dine with
the DirectorGeneral, and so I tried to make the most of it. I started talking about
performance, about spreadsheets, difficulties on the stock exchange and possible
new markets. He interrupted me; he was more interested in knowing more of what
I'd learned from Athena.
In the end, to my surprise, he turned the conversation to more personal matters.
'I understood what you meant when, during your paper, you talked about time. At
New Year, when I was still enjoying the holiday season, I decided to go and sit in
the garden for a while. I picked up the newspaper from the mailbox, but it
contained nothing of any importance, only the things that journalists had decided
we should know, feel involved in and have an opinion about.
'I thought of phoning someone at work, but that would be ridiculous, since they
would all be with their families. I had lunch with my wife, children and
grandchildren, took a nap, and when I woke up, I
made a few notes, then realised that it was still only two o'clock in the afternoon. I
had another three days of not working, and, however much I love being with my
family, I started to feel useless.
'The following day, taking advantage of this free time, I went to have my stomach
checked out, and, fortunately, the tests revealed nothing seriously wrong. I went to
the dentist, who said there was nothing wrong with my teeth either. I again had
lunch with my wife, children and grandchildren, took another nap, again woke up
at two in the afternoon, and realised that I had absolutely nothing on which to
focus my attention.
'I felt uneasy: shouldn't I be doing something? Well, if I wanted to invent work,
that wouldn't take much effort. We all have projects to develop, light bulbs to
change, leaves to sweep, books to put away, computer files to organise, etc. But
how about just facing up to the void? It was then that I remembered something
that seemed to me of great importance: I needed to walk to the letterbox – which
is less than a mile from my house in the country – and post one of the Christmas
cards lying forgotten on my desk.
'And I was surprised: why did I need to send that card today. Was it really so hard
just to stay where I was, doing nothing?
'A series of thoughts crossed my mind: friends who worry about things that haven't
yet happened; acquaintances who manage to fill every minute of their lives with
tasks that seem to me absurd; senseless conversations; long telephone calls in
which nothing of any importance is ever said. I've seen my directors inventing
work in order to justify their jobs; employees who feel afraid because they've been
given nothing important to do that day, which might mean that they're no longer
useful. My wife who torments herself because our son has got divorced, my son
who torments himself because our grandson, his son, got bad marks at school, our
grandson who is terrified because he's making his parents sad – even though we all
know that marks aren't that important.
'I had a long, hard struggle with myself not to get up from my chair. Gradually,
though, the anxiety gave way to contemplation, and I started listening to my soul –
or intuition or primary emotions, or whatever you choose to believe in. Whatever
you call it, that part of me had been longing to speak to me, but I had always been
too busy.
'In that case, it wasn't a dance, but the complete absence of noise and movement,
the silence, that brought me into contact with myself. And, believe it or not, I
learned a great deal about the problems bothering me, even though all those
problems had dissolved completely while I was sitting there. I didn't see God, but I
had a clearer understanding of what decisions to take.'
Before paying the bill, he suggested that I send the employee in question to Dubai,
where the bank was opening a new branch, and where the risks were considerable.
As a good manager, he knew that I had learned all I needed to learn, and now it
was merely a question of providing continuity. My employee could make a useful
contribution somewhere else. He didn't know this, but he was helping me to keep
the promise I'd made.
When I returned to London, I immediately told Athena about this invitation, and
she accepted at once. She told me that she spoke fluent Arabic (I knew this already
because of her father), although, since we would mainly be doing deals with
foreigners, not Arabs, this would not be essential. I thanked her for her help, but
she showed no curiosity about my talk at the conference, and merely asked when
she should pack her bags.
I still don't know whether the story of the boyfriend in Scotland Yard was a
fantasy or not. If it were true, I think Athena's murderer would already have been
arrested, because I don't believe anything the newspapers wrote about the crime. I
can understand financial engineering, I can even allow myself the luxury of saying
that dancing helps my employees to work better, but I will never comprehend how
it is that the best police force in the world catches some murderers, but not others.
Not that it makes much difference now.
Nabil Alaihi, age unknown, Bedouin
It made me very happy to know that Athena had kept a photo of me in a place of
honour in her apartment, but I don't really think what I taught her had any real
use. She came here to the desert, leading a three-year-old boy by the hand. She
opened her bag, took out a radio-cassette and sat down outside my tent. I know
that people from the city usually give my name to foreigners who want to
experience some local cooking, and so I told her at once that it was too early for
supper.
'I came for another reason,' she said. 'Your nephew Hamid is a client at the bank
where I work and he told me that you're a wise man.'
'Hamid is a rather foolish youth who may well say that I'm a wise man, but who
never follows my advice. Mohammed, the Prophet, may the blessings of God be
upon him, he was a wise man.'
guide.'
I pointed to her car.
'You shouldn't drive alone in a place you don't know, and you shouldn't come here
without a
Instead of replying, she turned on the radio-cassette. Then, all I could see was this
young woman dancing on the dunes and her son watching her in joyous
amazement; and the sound seemed to fill the whole desert. When she finished, she
asked if I had enjoyed it.
I said that I had. There is a sect in our religion which uses dance as a way of
getting closer to Allah blessed be His Name. (Editor's note: The sect in question is
Sufism.)
'Well,' said the woman, who introduced herself as Athena, 'ever since I was a child,
I've felt that I should grow closer to God, but life always took me further away
from Him. Music is one way I've discovered of getting close, but it isn't enough.
Whenever I dance, I see a light, and that light is now asking me to go further. But I
can't continue learning on my own; I need someone to teach me.'
'Anything will do,' I told her, 'because Allah, the merciful, is always near. Lead a
decent life, and that will be enough.'
But the woman appeared unconvinced. I said that I was busy, that I needed to
prepare supper for the few tourists who might appear. She told me that she'd wait
for as long as was necessary.
'And the child?'
'Don't worry about him.'
While I was making my usual preparations, I observed the woman and her son.
They could have been the same age; they ran about the desert, laughed, threw sand
at each other, and rolled down the dunes. The guide arrived with three German
tourists, who ate and asked for beer, and I had to explain that my religion forbade
me to drink or to serve alcoholic drinks. I invited the woman and her son to join
us for supper, and in that unexpected female presence, one of the Germans
became quite animated. He said that he was thinking of buying some land, that he
had a large fortune saved up and believed in the future of the region.
'Great,' she replied. 'I believe in the region too.'
'It would be good to have supper somewhere, so that we could talk about the
possibility of–'
'No,' she said, holding a card out to him, 'but if you like, you can get in touch with
my bank.' When the tourists left, we sat down outside the tent. The child soon fell
asleep on her lap. I fetched blankets for us all, and we sat looking up at the starry
sky. Finally, she broke the silence.
'Why did Hamid say that you were a wise man?'
'Perhaps so that I'll be more patient with him. There was a time when I tried to
teach him my art, but Hamid seemed more interested in earning money. He's
probably convinced by now that he's wiser than I am: he has an apartment and a
boat, while here I am in the middle of the desert, making meals for the occasional
tourist. He doesn't understand that I'm satisfied with what I do.'
'He understands perfectly, and he always speaks of you with great respect. And
what do you mean by your “art”?'
dance.'
'I watched you dancing today, well, I do the same thing, except that it's the letters
not my body that
She looked surprised.
'My way of approaching Allah – may his name be praised – has been through
calligraphy, and the search for the perfect meaning of each word. A single letter
requires us to distil in it all the energy it contains, as if we were carving out its
meaning. When sacred texts are written, they contain the soul of the man who
served as an instrument to spread them throughout the world. And that doesn't
apply only to sacred texts, but to every mark we place on paper. Because the hand
that draws each line reflects the soul of the person making that line.'
'Would you teach me what you know?'
'Firstly, I don't think anyone as full of energy as you would have the patience for
this. Besides, it's not part of your world, where everything is printed, without, if
you'll allow me to say so, much thought being given to what is being published.'
'I'd like to try.'
And so, for more than six months, that woman – whom I'd judged to be too
restless and exuberant to be able to sit still for a moment – came to visit me every
Friday. Her son would go to one corner of the tent, take up paper and brushes,
and he, too, would devote himself to revealing in his paintings whatever the
heavens determined.
When I saw the immense effort it took her to keep still and to maintain the correct
posture, I said: 'Don't you think you'd be better off finding something else to do?'
She replied: 'No, I need this, I need to calm my soul, and I still haven't learned
everything you can teach me. The light of the Vertex told me that I should
continue.' I never asked her what the Vertex was, nor was I interested.
The first lesson, and perhaps the most difficult, was: 'Patience!'
Writing wasn't just the expression of a thought, but a way of reflecting on the
meaning of each word. Together we began work on texts written by an Arab poet,
because I do not feel that the Koran is suitable for someone brought up in
another faith. I dictated each letter, and that way she could concentrate on what
she was doing, instead of immediately wanting to know the meaning of each word
or phrase or line.
'Once, someone told me that music had been created by God, and that rapid
movement was necessary for people to get in touch with themselves,' said Athena
on one of those afternoons we spent together. 'For years, I felt that this was true,
and now I'm being forced to do the most difficult thing in the world – slow down.
Why is patience so important?'
'Because it makes us pay attention.'
'But I can dance obeying only my soul, which forces me to concentrate on
something greater than myself, and brings me into contact with God – if I can use
that word. Dance has already helped me to change many things in my life,
including my work. Isn't the soul more important?'
'Of course it is, but if your soul could communicate with your brain, you would be
able to change even more things.'
We continued our work together. I knew that, at some point, I would have to tell
her something that she might not be ready to hear, and so I tried to make use of
every minute to prepare her spirit. I explained that before the word comes the
thought. And before the thought, there is the divine spark that placed it there.
Everything, absolutely everything on this Earth makes sense, and even the smallest
things are worthy of our consideration.
'I've educated my body so that it can manifest every sensation in my soul,' she said.
'Now you must educate only your fingers, so that they can manifest every
sensation in your body. That will concentrate your body's strength.'
'Are you a teacher?'
'What is a teacher? I'll tell you: it isn't someone who teaches something, but
someone who inspires the student to give of her best in order to discover what she
already knows.'
I sensed that, despite her youth, Athena had already experienced this. Writing
reveals the personality, and I could see that she was aware of being loved, not just
by her son, but by her family and possibly by a man. I saw too that she had
mysterious gifts, but I tried never to let her know that I knew this, since these gifts
could bring about not only an encounter with God, but also her perdition.
I did not only teach her calligraphy techniques. I also tried to pass on to her the
philosophy of the calligraphers.
'The brush with which you are making these lines is just an instrument. It has no
consciousness; it follows the desires of the person holding it. And in that it is very
like what we call “life”. Many people in this world are merely playing a role,
unaware that there is an Invisible Hand guiding them. At this moment, in your
hands, in the brush tracing each letter, lie all the intentions of your soul. Try to
understand the importance of this.'
'I do understand, and I see that it's important to maintain a certain elegance. You
tell me to sit in a particular position, to venerate the materials I'm going to use, and
only to begin when I have done so.'
Naturally, if she respected the brush that she used, she would realise that in order
to learn to write she must cultivate serenity and elegance. And serenity comes from
the heart.
'Elegance isn't a superficial thing, it's the way mankind has found to honour life
and work. That's why, when you feel uncomfortable in that position, you mustn't
think that it's false or artificial: it's real and true precisely because it's difficult. That
position means that both the paper and the brush feel proud of the effort you're
making. The paper ceases to be a flat, colourless surface and takes on the depth of
the things placed on it. Elegance is the correct posture if the writing is to be
perfect. It's the same with life: when all superfluous things have been discarded, we
discover simplicity and concentration. The simpler and more sober the posture,
the more beautiful it will be, even though, at first, it may seem uncomfortable.'
Occasionally, she would talk about her work. She said she was enjoying what she
was doing and that she had just received a job offer from a powerful emir. He had
gone to the bank to see the manager, who was a friend of his (emirs never go to
banks to withdraw money, they have staff who can do that for them), and while he
was talking to Athena, he mentioned that he was looking for someone to take
charge of selling
land, and wondered if she would be interested.
Who would want to buy land in the middle of the desert or in a far-flung port? I
decided to say nothing and, looking back, I'm glad I stayed silent.
Only once did she mention the man she loved, although whenever she was there
when tourists arrived, one of the men would always start flirting with her. Normally
Athena simply ignored them, but, one day, a man suggested that he knew her
boyfriend. She turned pale and immediately shot a glance at her son, who,
fortunately, wasn't listening to the conversation.
'How do you know him?'
'I'm joking,' said the man. 'I just wanted to find out if you were unattached.'
She didn't say anything, but I understood from this exchange that the man in her
life was not the father of her son.
One day, she arrived earlier than usual. She said that she'd left her job at the bank
and started selling real estate, and would now have more free time. I explained that
I couldn't start her class any earlier because I had various things to do.
'I can combine two things: movement and stillness; joy and concentration.'
She went over to the car to fetch her radio-cassette and, from then on, Athena
would dance in the desert before the start of our class, while the little boy ran
round her, laughing. When she sat down to practise calligraphy, her hand was
steadier than usual.
'There are two kinds of letter,' I explained. 'The first is precise, but lacks soul. In
this case, although the calligrapher may have mastered the technique, he has
focused solely on the craft, which is why it hasn't evolved, but become repetitive;
he hasn't grown at all, and one day he'll give up the practice of writing, because he
feels it is mere routine.
'The second kind is done with great technique, but with soul as well. For that to
happen, the intention of the writer must be in harmony with the word. In this case,
the saddest verses cease to be clothed in tragedy and are transformed into simple
facts encountered along the way.'
'What do you do with your drawings?' asked the boy in perfect Arabic. He might
not understand our conversation, but he was eager to share in his mother's work.
'I sell them.'
'Can I sell my drawings?'
'You should sell your drawings. One day, you'll become rich that way and be able
to help your
mother.'
He was pleased by my comment and went back to what he was doing, painting a
colourful butterfly. 'And what shall I do with my texts?' asked Athena.
'You know the effort it took to sit in the correct position, to quieten your soul,
keep your intentions clear and respect each letter of each word. Meanwhile, keep
practising. After a great deal of practice, we no longer think about all the necessary
movements we must make; they become part of our existence. Before reaching
that stage, however, you must practise and repeat. And if that's not enough, you
must practise and repeat some more.
'Look at a skilled blacksmith working steel. To the untrained eye, he's merely
repeating the same hammer blows, but anyone trained in the art of calligraphy
knows that each time the blacksmith lifts the hammer and brings it down, the
intensity of the blow is different. The hand repeats the same gesture, but as it
approaches the metal, it understands that it must touch it with more or less force.
It's the same thing with repetition: it may seem the same, but it's always different.
The moment will come when you no longer need to think about what you're
doing. You become the letter, the ink, the paper, the word.'
This moment arrived almost a year later. By then, Athena was already known in
Dubai and recommended customers to dine in my tent, and through them I
learned that her career was going very well: she was selling pieces of desert! One
night, the emir in person arrived, preceded by a great retinue. I was terrified; I
wasn't prepared for that, but he reassured me and thanked me for what I was
doing for his employee.
'She's an excellent person and attributes her qualities to what she's learning from
you. I'm thinking of giving her a share in the company. It might be a good idea to
send my other sales staff to learn calligraphy, especially now that Athena is about
to take a month's holiday.'
'It wouldn't help,' I replied. 'Calligraphy is just one of the ways which Allah –
blessed be His Name – places before us. It teaches objectivity and patience,
respect and elegance, but we can learn all that–' '–through dance,' said Athena, who
was standing nearby.
'Or through selling land,' I added.
When they had all left, and the little boy had lain down in one corner of the tent,
his eyes heavy with sleep, I brought out the calligraphy materials and asked her to
write something. In the middle of the word, I took the brush from her hand. It was
time to say what had to be said. I suggested that we go for a little walk in the desert.
'You have learned what you needed to learn,' I said. 'Your calligraphy is getting
more and more individual and spontaneous. It's no longer a mere repetition of
beauty, but a personal, creative gesture. You have understood what all great
painters understand: in order to forget the rules, you must know them and respect
them.
'You no longer need the tools that helped you learn. You no longer need paper,
ink or brush, because the path is more important than whatever made you set off
along it. Once, you told me that the person who taught you to dance used to
imagine the music playing in his head, and even so, he was able to repeat the
necessary rhythms.'
'He was.'
'If all the words were joined together, they wouldn't make sense, or, at the very
least, they'd be extremely hard to decipher. The spaces are crucial.'
She nodded.
'And although you have mastered the words, you haven't yet mastered the blank
spaces. When you're concentrating, your hand is perfect, but when it jumps from
one word to the next, it gets lost.' 'How do you know that?'
'Am I right?'
'Absolutely. Before I focus on the next word, for a fraction of a second I lose
myself. Things I don't want to think about take over.'
'And you know exactly what those things are.'
Athena knew, but she said nothing until we went back to the tent and she could
cradle her sleeping son in her arms. Her eyes were full of tears, although she was
trying hard to control herself.
'The emir said that you were going on holiday.'
She opened the car door, put the key in the ignition and started the engine. For a
few moments, only the noise of the engine troubled the silence of the desert.
'I know what you mean,' she said at last. 'When I write, when I dance, I'm guided
by the Hand that created everything. When I look at Viorel sleeping, I know that
he knows he's the fruit of my love for his father, even though I haven't seen his
father for more than a year. But I …'
She fell silent again. Her silence was the blank space between the words.
'… but I don't know the hand that first rocked me in the cradle. The hand that
wrote me in the book of the world.'
I merely nodded.
'Do you think that matters?'
'Not necessarily. But in your case, until you touch that hand, your, shall we say,
calligraphy will not improve.'
'I don't see why I should bother to look for someone who never took the trouble
to love me.' She closed the car door, smiled and drove off. Despite her last words,
I knew what her next step would be.
Samira R. Khalil, Athena's mother
It was as if all her professional success, her ability to earn money, her joy at having
found a new love, her contentment when she played with her son – my grandson
– had all been relegated to second place. I was quite simply terrified when Sherine
told me that she'd decided to go in search of her birth mother.
At first, of course, I took consolation in the thought that the adoption centre
would no longer exist, the paperwork would all have been lost, any officials she
encountered would prove implacable, the recent collapse of the Romanian
government would make travel impossible, and the womb that bore her would
long since have vanished. This, however, provided only a momentary consolation:
my daughter was capable of anything and would overcome seemingly impossible
obstacles.
Up until then, the subject had been taboo in the family. Sherine knew she was
adopted, because the psychiatrist in Beirut had advised me to tell her as soon as
she was old enough to understand. But she had never shown any desire to know
where she had come from. Her home had been Beirut, when it was still our home.
The adopted son of a friend of mine had committed suicide at the age of sixteen
when he acquired a biological sister, and so we had never attempted to have more
children of our own, and we did everything we could to make her feel that she was
the sole reason for our joys and sadnesses, our love and our hopes. And yet, it
seemed that none of this counted. Dear God, how ungrateful children can be!
Knowing my daughter as I did, I realised that there was no point in arguing with
her about this. My husband and I didn't sleep for a whole week, and every
morning, every evening, we were bombarded with the same question:
'Whereabouts in Romania was I born?' To make matters worse, Viorel kept crying,
as if he understood what was going on.
I decided to consult a psychiatrist again. I asked why a young woman who had
everything in life should always be so dissatisfied.
'We all want to know where we came from,' he said. 'On the philosophical level,
that's the fundamental question for all human beings. In your daughter's case, I
think it's perfectly reasonable that she should want to go in search of her roots.
Wouldn't you be curious to know?'
'No, I wouldn't. On the contrary, I'd think it dangerous to go in search of someone
who had denied and rejected me when I was still too helpless to survive on my
own.'
But the psychiatrist insisted:
'Rather than getting into a confrontation with her, try to help. Perhaps when she
sees that it's no longer a problem for you, she'll give up. The year she spent far
from her friends must have created a sense of emotional need, which she's now
trying to make up for by provoking you like this. She simply wants to be sure that
she's loved.'
It would have been better if Sherine had gone to the psychiatrist herself, then she
would have understood the reasons for her behaviour.
'Show that you're confident and don't see this as a threat. And if, in the end, she
really does go ahead with it, simply give her the information she needs. As I
understand it, she's always been a difficult child. Perhaps she'll emerge from this
search a stronger person.'
I asked if the psychiatrist had any children. He didn't, and I knew then that he
wasn't the right person to advise me.
That night, when we were sitting in front of the TV, Sherine returned to the
subject: 'What are you watching?'
'The news.'
'What for?'
'To find out what's going on in Lebanon,' replied my husband.
I saw the trap, but it was too late. Sherine immediately pounced on this opening.
'You see, you're curious to know what's going on in the country where you were
born. You're settled in England, you have friends, Dad earns plenty of money,
you've got security, and yet you still buy Lebanese newspapers. You channel-hop
until you find a bit of news to do with Beirut. You imagine the future as if it were
the past, not realising that the war will never end. What I mean is that if you're not
in touch with your roots, you feel as if you'd lost touch with the world. Is it so very
hard then for you to understand what I'm feeling?'
'You're our daughter.'
'And proud to be. And I'll always be your daughter. Please don't doubt my love or
my gratitude for everything you've done for me. All I'm asking is to be given the
chance to visit the place where I was born and perhaps ask my birth mother why
she abandoned me or perhaps, when I look into her eyes, simply say nothing. If I
don't at least try and do that, I'll feel like a coward and I won't ever understand the
blank spaces.'
'The blank spaces?'
'I learned calligraphy while I was in Dubai. I dance whenever I can, but music only
exists because the pauses exist, and sentences only exist because the blank spaces
exist. When I'm doing something, I feel complete, but no one can keep active
twenty-four hours a day. As soon as I stop, I feel there's something lacking. You've
often said to me that I'm a naturally restless person, but I didn't choose to be that
way. I'd like to sit here quietly, watching television, but I can't. My brain won't stop.
Sometimes, I think I'm going mad. I need always to be dancing, writing, selling
land, taking care of Viorel, or reading whatever I find to read. Do you think that's
normal?'
'Perhaps it's just your temperament,' said my husband.
The conversation ended there, as it always ended, with Viorel crying, Sherine
retreating into silence, and with me convinced that children never acknowledge
what their parents have done for them. However, over breakfast the next day, it
was my husband who brought the subject up again.
'A while ago, while you were in the Middle East, I looked into the possibility of
going home to Beirut. I went to the street where we used to live. The house is no
longer there, but, despite the foreign occupation and the constant incursions, they
are slowly rebuilding the country. I felt a sense of euphoria. Perhaps it was the
moment to start all over again. And it was precisely that expression, “start all over
again”, that brought me back to reality. The time has passed when I could allow
myself that luxury. Nowadays, I just want to go on doing what I'm doing, and I
don't need any new adventures.
'I sought out the people I used to enjoy a drink with after work. Most of them
have left, and those who have stayed complain all the time about a constant feeling
of insecurity. I walked past some of my old haunts, and I felt like a stranger, as if
nothing there belonged to me anymore. The worst of it was that my dream of one
day returning gradually disappeared when I found myself back in the city where I
was born. Even so, I needed to make that visit. The songs of exile are still there in
my heart, but I know now that I'll never again live in Lebanon. In a way, the days
I spent in Beirut helped me to a better understanding of the place where I live
now, and to value each second that I spend in London.'
'What are you trying to tell me, Dad?'
'That you're right. Perhaps it really would be best to understand those blank
spaces. We can look after Viorel while you're away.'
He went to the bedroom and returned with the yellow file containing the adoption
papers. He gave them to Sherine, kissed her and said it was time he went to work.
Heron Ryan, journalist
For a whole morning in 1990, all I could see from the sixth-floor window of the
hotel was the main government building. A flag had just been placed on the roof,
marking the exact spot where the megalomaniac dictator had fled in a helicopter
only to find death a few hours later at the hands of those he had oppressed for
twenty-two years.
In his plan to create a capital that would rival Washington, Ceauºescu had ordered
all the old houses to be razed to the ground. Indeed, Bucharest had the dubious
honour of being described as the city that had suffered the worst destruction
outside of a war or a natural disaster.
The day I arrived, I attempted to go for a short walk with my interpreter, but in the
streets I saw only poverty, bewilderment, and a sense that there was no future, no
past and no present: the people were living in a kind of limbo, with little idea of
what was happening in their country or in the rest of the world. When I went back
ten years later and saw the whole country rising up out of the ashes, I realised
human beings can overcome any difficulty, and that the Romanian people were a
fine example ofjust that.
But on that other grey morning, in the grey foyer of a gloomy hotel, all I was
concerned about was whether my interpreter would manage to get a car and
enough petrol so that I could carry out some final research for the BBC
documentary I was working on. He was taking a very long time, and I was
beginning to have my doubts. Would I have to go back to England having failed to
achieve my goal? I'd already invested a significant amount of money in contracts
with historians, in the script, in filming interviews, but before the BBC would sign
the final contract, they insisted on me visiting Dracula's castle to see what state it
was in. The trip was costing more than expected.
I tried phoning my girlfriend, but was told I'd have to wait nearly an hour to get a
line. My interpreter might arrive at any moment with the car and there was no time
to lose, and so I decided not to risk waiting.
I asked around to see if I could buy an English newspaper, but there were none to
be had. To take my mind off my anxiety, I started looking, as discreetly as I could,
at the people around me drinking tea,
possibly oblivious to everything that had happened the year before – popular
uprisings, the cold-blooded murder of civilians in Timiºoara, shoot-outs in the
streets between the people and the dreaded secret service as the latter tried
desperately to hold on to the power fast slipping from their grasp. I noticed a
group of three Americans, an interesting-looking woman who was, however, glued
to the fashion magazine she was
reading, and some men sitting round a table, talking loudly in a language I couldn't
identify.
I was just about to get up yet again and go over to the entrance to see if my
interpreter was anywhere to be seen, when she came in. She must have been a little
more than twenty years old. She sat down, ordered some breakfast, and I noticed
that she spoke English. None of the other men present appeared to notice her
arrival, but the other woman interrupted her reading.
Perhaps because of my anxiety or because of the place, which was beginning to
depress me, I plucked up courage and went over to her.
'Excuse me, I don't usually do this. I always think breakfast is the most private
meal of the day.' She smiled, told me her name, and I immediately felt wary. It had
been too easy – she might be a prostitute. Her English, however, was perfect and
she was very discreetly dressed. I decided not to ask any questions, and began
talking at length about myself, noticing as I did so that the woman on the next
table had put down her magazine and was listening to our conversation.
'I'm an independent producer working for the BBC in London, and, at the
moment, I'm trying to find a way to get to Transylvania…'
I noticed the light in her eyes change.
'…so that I can finish the documentary I'm making about the myth of the
vampire.'
I waited. This subject always aroused people's curiosity, but she lost interest as
soon as I mentioned the reason for my visit.
'You'll just have to take the bus,' she said. 'Although I doubt you'll find what you're
looking for. If you want to know more about Dracula, read the book. The author
never even visited Romania.'
'What about you, do you know Transylvania?' 'I don't know.'
That was not an answer; perhaps it was because English – despite her British
accent – was not her mother tongue.
'But I'm going there too,' she went on. 'On the bus, of course.'
Judging by her clothes, she was not an adventuress who sets off round the world
visiting exotic places. The idea that she might be a prostitute returned; perhaps she
was trying to get closer to me. 'Would you like a lift?'
'I've already bought my ticket.'
I insisted, thinking that her first refusal was just part of the game. She refused
again, saying that she needed to make that journey alone. I asked where she was
from, and there was a long pause before she replied.
'Like I said, from Transylvania.'
'That isn't quite what you said. But if that's so, perhaps you could help me with
finding locations for the film and…'
My unconscious mind was telling me to explore the territory a little more, because
although the idea that she might be a prostitute was still buzzing around in my
head, I very, very much wanted her to come with me. She politely refused my
offer. The other woman joined in the conversation at this point, as if to protect
the younger woman, and I felt then that I was in the way and decided to leave.
My interpreter arrived shortly afterwards, out of breath, saying that he'd made all
the necessary arrangements, but that (as expected) it was going to cost a lot of
money. I went up to my room, grabbed my suitcase, which I'd packed earlier, got
into the Russian wreck of a car, drove down the long, almost deserted avenues,
and realised that I had with me my small camera, my belongings, my anxieties, a
couple of bottles of mineral water, some sandwiches, and the image of someone
that stubbornly refused to leave my head.
In the days that followed, as I was trying to piece together a script on the historical
figure of Dracula, and interviewing both locals and intellectuals on the subject of
the vampire myth (with, as foreseen, little success), I gradually became aware that I
was no longer merely trying to make a documentary for British television. I wanted
to meet that arrogant, unfriendly, self-sufficient young woman whom I'd seen in a
dining room in a hotel in Bucharest, and who would, at that moment, be
somewhere nearby. I knew absolutely nothing about her apart from her name, but,
like the vampire of the myth, she seemed to be sucking up all my energy.
In my world, and in the world of those I lived with, this was absurd, nonsensical,
unacceptable.
Deidre O'Neill, known as Edda
'I don't know what you came here to do, but whatever it was, you must see it
through to the end.' She looked at me, startled.
'Who are you?'
I started talking about the magazine I was reading, and after a while, the man sitting
with her decided to get up and leave. Now I could tell her who I was.
'If you mean what do I do for a living, I qualified as a doctor some years ago, but I
don't think that's the answer you want to hear.'
I paused.
'Your next step, though, will be to try to find out, through clever questioning,
exactly what I'm doing here, in a country that's only just emerging from years of
terrible oppression.'
'I'll be straightforward then. What did you come here to do?'
I could have said: I came for the funeral of my teacher, because I felt he deserved
that homage. But it would be imprudent to touch on the subject. She may have
shown no interest in vampires, but the word 'teacher' would be sure to attract her
attention. Since my oath will not allow me to lie, I replied with a halftruth.
'I wanted to see where a writer called Mircea Eliade lived. You've probably never
heard of him, but Eliade, who spent most of his life in France, was a world
authority on myths.'
The young woman looked at her watch, feigning indifference. I went on:
'And I'm not talking about vampires, I'm talking about people who, let's say, are
following the same path you're following.'
She was about to take a sip of her coffee, but she stopped:
'Are you from the government? Or are you someone my parents engaged to follow
me?'
It was my turn then to feel uncertain as to whether to continue the conversation.
Her response had been unnecessarily aggressive. But I could see her aura, her
anxiety. She was very like me when I was her age: full of internal and external
wounds that drove me to want to heal people on the physical plane and to help
them find their path on the spiritual plane. I wanted to say: 'Your wounds will help
you, my dear,' then pick up my magazine and leave.
If I had done that, Athena's path might have been completely different, and she
would still be alive and living with the man she loved. She would have brought up
her son and watched him grow, get married and have lots of children. She would
be rich, possibly the owner of a company selling real estate. She had all the
necessary qualities to find success and happiness. She'd suffered enough to be able
to use her scars to her advantage, and it was just a matter of time before she
managed to control her anxiety and move on.
So what kept me sitting there, trying to keep the conversation going? The answer is
very simple: curiosity. I couldn't understand what that brilliant light was doing there
in the cold hotel.
I continued:
'Mircea Eliade wrote books with strange titles: Occultism, Witchcraft and Cultural
Fashions, for example. Or The Sacred and the Profane. My teacher' (I
inadvertently let the word slip, but she either wasn't listening or else pretended not
to have noticed) 'loved his work. And something tells me it's a subject you're
interested in too.'
She glanced at her watch again.
'I'm going to Sibiu,' she said. 'My bus leaves in an hour. I'm looking for my mother,
if that's what you want to know. I work as a real estate agent in the Middle East, I
have a son of nearly four, I'm divorced, and my parents live in London. My
adoptive parents, of course, because I was abandoned as a baby.'
She was clearly at a very advanced stage of perception, and had identified with me,
even though she wasn't aware of this yet.
'Yes, that's what I wanted to know.'
'Did you have to come all this way just to do research into a writer? Aren't there
any libraries where you live?'
'The fact is that Eliade only lived in Romania until he graduated from university. So
if I really wanted to know more about his work, I should go to Paris, London or to
Chicago, where he died. However, what I'm doing isn't research in the normal
sense of the word: I wanted to see the ground where he placed his feet. I wanted
to feel what inspired him to write about things that affect my life and the lives of
people I respect.'
'Did he write about medicine too?'
I had better not answer that. I saw that she'd picked up on the word 'teacher', and
assumed it must be related to my profession.
The young woman got to her feet. I felt she knew what I was talking about. I
could see her light shining more intensely. I only achieve this state of perception
when I'm close to someone very like myself. 'Would you mind coming with me to
the bus station?' she asked.
Not at all. My plane didn't leave until later that night, and a whole, dull, endless day
stretched out before me. At least I would have someone to talk to for a while.
She went upstairs, returned with her suitcases in her hand and a series of questions
in her head. She began her interrogation as soon as we left the hotel.
'I may never see you again,' she said, 'but I feel that we have something in
common. Since this may be the last opportunity we have in this incarnation to talk
to each other, would you mind being direct in your answers?'
I nodded.
'Based on what you've read in all those books, do you believe that through dance
we can enter a trance-like state that helps us to see a light? And that the light tells
us nothing – only whether we're happy or sad?'
A good question!
'Of course, and that happens not only through dance, but through anything that
allows us to focus our attention and to separate body from spirit. Like yoga or
prayer or Buddhist meditation.'
'Or calligraphy.'
'I hadn't thought of that, but it's possible. At such moments, when the body sets
the soul free, the soul either rises up to heaven or descends into hell, depending on
the person's state of mind. In both cases, it learns what it needs to learn: to destroy
or to heal. But I'm no longer interested in individual paths; in my tradition, I need
the help of … are you listening to me?'
'No.'
She had stopped in the middle of the street and was staring at a little girl who
appeared to have been abandoned. She went to put her hand in her bag.
'Don't do that,' I said. 'Look across the street at that woman, the one with cruel
eyes. She's put the girl there purely in order to–'
'I don't care.'
She took out a few coins. I grabbed her hand.
'Let's buy her something to eat. That would be more useful.'
I asked the little girl to go with us to a café and bought her a sandwich. The little
girl smiled and thanked me. The eyes of the woman across the street seemed to
glitter with hatred, but, for the first time, the grey eyes of the young woman walking
at my side looked at me with respect.
'What were you saying?' she asked.
'It doesn't matter. Do you know what happened to you a few moments ago? You
went into the same trance that your dancing provokes.'
'No, you're wrong.'
'I'm right. Something touched your unconscious mind. Perhaps you saw yourself as
you would have been if you hadn't been adopted – begging in the street. At that
moment, your brain stopped reacting. Your spirit left you and travelled down to
hell to meet the demons from your past. Because of that, you didn't notice the
woman across the street – you were in a trance, a disorganised, chaotic trance that
was driving you to do something which was good in theory, but, in practice,
pointless. As if you were–'
'–in the blank space between the letters. In the moment when a note of music
ends and the next has not yet begun.'
'Exactly. And such a trance can be dangerous.'
I almost said: 'It's the kind of trance provoked by fear. It paralyses the person,
leaves them unable to react; the body doesn't respond, the soul is no longer there.
You were terrified by everything that could have happened to you had fate not
placed your parents in your path.' But she had put her suitcases down on the
ground and was standing in front of me.
'Who are you? Why are you saying all this?'
'As a doctor, I'm known as Deidre O'Neill. Pleased to meet you, and what's your
name?' 'Athena. Although according to my passport I'm Sherine Khalil.'
'Who gave you the name Athena?'
'No one important. But I didn't ask you for your name, I asked who you are and
why you spoke to me. And why I felt the same need to talk to you. Was it just
because we were the only two women in that hotel dining room? I don't think so.
And you're saying things to me that make sense of my life.'
She picked up her bags again, and we continued walking towards the bus station.
'I have another name too – Edda. But it wasn't chosen by chance, nor do I believe
it was chance that brought us together.'
Before us was the entrance to the bus station, with various people going in and out
– soldiers in uniform, farmers, pretty women dressed as if they were still living in
the 1950s.
'If it wasn't chance, what was it?'
She had another half an hour before her bus left, and I could have said: It was the
Mother. Some chosen spirits emit a special light and are drawn to each other, and
you – Sherine or Athena – are one of those spirits, but you need to work very hard
to use that energy to your advantage.
I could have explained that she was following the classic path of the witch, who,
through her individual persona, seeks contact with the upper and lower world, but
always ends up destroying her own life – she serves others, gives out energy, but
receives nothing in return.
I could have explained that, although all paths are different, there is always a point
when people come together, celebrate together, discuss their difficulties, and
prepare themselves for the Rebirth of the Mother. I could have said that contact
with the Divine Light is the greatest reality a human being can experience, and yet,
in my tradition, that contact cannot be made alone, because we've suffered
centuries of persecution, and this has taught us many things.
'Would you like to have a coffee while I wait for the bus?'
No, I did not. I would only end up saying things that might, at that stage, be
misinterpreted. 'Certain people have been very important in my life,' she went on.
'My landlord, for example, or the calligrapher I met in the desert near Dubai. Who
knows, you might have things to say to me that I can share with them, and repay
them for all they taught me.'
So she had already had teachers in her life – excellent! Her spirit was ripe. All she
needed was to continue her training, otherwise she would end up losing all she had
achieved. But was I the right person?
I asked the Mother to inspire me, to tell me what to do. I got no answer, which did
not surprise me. She always behaves like that when it's up to me to take
responsibility for a decision.
I gave Athena my business card and asked her for hers. She gave me an address in
Dubai, a country I would have been unable to find on the map.
I decided to try making a joke, to test her out a little more:
'Isn't it a bit of a coincidence that three English people should meet in a hotel in
Bucharest?' 'Well, from your card I see that you're Scottish. The man I met
apparently works in England, but I don't know anything else about him.'
She took a deep breath: 'And I'm … Romanian.'
I gave an excuse and said that I had to rush back to the hotel and pack my bags.
Now she knew where to find me, if it was written that we would meet again, we
would. The important thing is to allow fate to intervene in our lives and to decide
what is best for everyone.
Vosho 'Bushalo', 65, restaurant owner
These Europeans come here thinking they know everything, thinking they deserve
the very best treatment, that they have the right to bombard us with questions
which we're obliged to answer. On the other hand, they think that by giving us
some tricksy name, like 'travellers' or 'Roma', they can put right the
many wrongs they've done us in the past.
Why can't they just call us gipsies and put an end to all the stories that make us
look as if we were cursed in the eyes of the world? They accuse us of being the
fruit of the illicit union between a woman and the Devil himself. They say that one
of us forged the nails that fixed Christ to the cross, that mothers should be careful
when our caravans come near, because we steal children and enslave them.
And because of this there have been frequent massacres throughout history; in the
Middle Ages we were hunted as witches; for centuries our testimony wasn't even
accepted in the German courts. I was born before the Nazi wind swept through
Europe and I saw my father marched off to a concentration camp in Poland, with
a humiliating black triangle sewn to his clothes. Of the 500,000 gipsies sent for
slave labour, only 5,000 survived to tell the tale.
And no one, absolutely no one, wants to hear about this.
Right up until last year, our culture, religion and language were banned in this
godforsaken part of the world, where most of the tribes decided to settle. If you
asked anyone in the city what they thought of gipsies, their immediate response
would be: 'They're all thieves.' However hard we try to lead normal lives by ceasing
our eternal wanderings and living in places where we're easily identifiable, the
racism continues. Our children are forced to sit at the back of the class and not a
week goes by without someone insulting them.
Then people complain that we don't give straight answers, that we try to disguise
ourselves, that we never openly admit our origins. Why would we do that?
Everyone knows what a gipsy looks like, and everyone knows how to 'protect'
themselves from our 'curses'.
When a stuck-up, intellectual young woman appears, smiling and claiming to be
part of our culture and our race, I'm immediately on my guard. She might have
been sent by the Securitate, the secret police who work for that mad dictator – the
Conducator, the Genius of the Carpathians, the Leader. They say he was put on
trial and shot, but I don't believe it. His son may have disappeared from the scene
for the moment, but he's still a powerful figure in these parts.
The young woman insists; she smiles, as if she were saying something highly
amusing, and tells me that her mother is a gipsy and that she'd like to find her. She
knows her full name. How could she obtain such information without the help of
the Securitate?
It's best not to get on the wrong side of people who have government contacts. I
tell her that I know nothing, that I'm just a gipsy who's decided to lead an honest
life, but she won't listen: she wants to find her mother. I know who her mother is,
and I know, too, that more than twenty years ago, she had a child she gave up to
an orphanage and never heard from again. We had to take her mother in because
a blacksmith who thought he was the master of the universe insisted on it. But
who can guarantee that this intellectual young woman standing before me really is
Liliana's daughter? Before trying to find out who her mother is, she should at least
respect some of our customs and not turn up dressed in red, if it's not her wedding
day. She ought to wear longer skirts as well, so as not to arouse men's lust. And she
should be more respectful.
If I speak of her now in the present tense, it's because for those who travel, time
does not exist, only space. We came from far away, some say from India, others
from Egypt, but the fact is that we carry the past with us as if it had all just
happened. And the persecutions continue.
The young woman is trying to be nice and to show that she knows about our
culture, when that doesn't matter at all. After all, she should know about our
traditions.
'In town I was told that you're a Rom Baro, a tribal leader. Before I came here, I
learned a lot about our history–'
'Not “our”, please. It's my history, the history of my wife, my children, my tribe.
You're a European. You were never stoned in the street as I was when I was five
years old.'
'I think the situation is getting better.'
'The situation is always getting better, then it immediately gets worse.'
But she keeps smiling. She orders a whisky. One of our women would never do
that.
If she'd come in here just to have a drink or looking for company, I'd treat her like
any other customer. I've learned to be friendly, attentive, discreet, because my
business depends on that. When my customers want to know more about the
gipsies, I offer them a few curious facts, tell them to listen to the group who'll be
playing later on, make a few remarks about our culture, and then they leave with
the impression that they know everything about us.
But this young woman isn't just another tourist: she says she belongs to our race.
She again shows me the certificate she got from the government. I can believe that
the government kills, steals and lies, but it wouldn't risk handing out false
certificates, and so she really must be Liliana's daughter, because the certificate
gives her full name and address. I learned from the television that the Genius of
the Carpathians, the Father of the People, our Conducator, the one who left us to
starve while he exported all our food, the one who lived in palaces and used
gold-plated cutlery while the people were dying of starvation, that same man and
his wretched wife used to get the Securitate to trawl the orphanages selecting
babies to be trained as State assassins.
They only ever took boys, though, never girls. Perhaps she really is Liliana's
daughter.
I look at the certificate once more and wonder whether or not I should tell her
where her mother is. Liliana deserves to meet this intellectual, claiming to be 'one
of us'. Liliana deserves to look this woman in the eye. I think she suffered enough
when she betrayed her people, slept with a gadje (Editor's note: foreigner) and
shamed her parents. Perhaps the moment has come to end her hell, for her to see
that her daughter survived, got rich, and might even be able to help her out of the
poverty she lives in.
Perhaps this young woman will pay me for this information; perhaps it'll be of
some advantage to our tribe, because we're living in confusing times. Everyone's
saying that the Genius of the Carpathians is dead, and they even show photos of
his execution, but, who knows, he could come back tomorrow, and it'll all turn out
to have been a clever trick on his part to find out who really was on his side and
who was prepared to betray him.
The musicians will start playing soon, so I'd better talk business.
'I know where you can find this woman. I can take you to her.' I adopt a friendlier
tone of voice. 'But I think that information is worth something.'
for.
'I was prepared for that,' she says, holding out a much larger sum of money than I
was going to ask
'That's not even enough for the taxi fare.'
'I'll pay you the same amount again when I reach my destination.'
And I sense that, for the first time, she feels uncertain. She suddenly seems afraid
of what she's about to do. I grab the money she's placed on the counter.
'I'll take you to see Liliana tomorrow.'
Her hands are trembling. She orders another whisky, but suddenly a man comes
into the bar, sees her, blushes scarlet and comes straight over to her. I gather that
they only met yesterday, and yet here they are talking as if they were old friends.
His eyes are full of desire. She's perfectly aware of this and encourages him. The
man orders a bottle of wine, and the two sit down at a table, and it's as if she'd
forgotten all about her mother.
However, I want the other half of that money. When I serve them their drinks, I
tell her I'll be at her hotel at ten o'clock in the morning.
Heron Ryan, journalist
Immediately after the first glass of wine, she told me, unprompted, that she had a
boyfriend who worked for Scotland Yard. It was a lie, of course. She must have
read the look in my eyes, and this was her way of keeping me at a distance.
I told her that I had a girlfriend, which made us even.
Ten minutes after the music had started, she stood up. We had said very little – she
asked no questions about my research into vampires, and we exchanged only
generalities: our impressions of the city, complaints about the state of the roads.
But what I saw next – or, rather, what everyone in the restaurant saw – was a
goddess revealing herself in all her glory, a priestess invoking angels and demons.
Her eyes were closed and she seemed no longer to be conscious of who she was
or where she was or why she was there; it was as if she were floating and
simultaneously summoning up her past, revealing her present and predicting the
future. She mingled eroticism with chastity, pornography with revelation, worship
of God and nature, all at the same time.
People stopped eating and started watching what was happening. She was no
longer following the music, the musicians were trying to keep up with her steps,
and that restaurant in the basement of an old building in the city of Sibiu was
transformed into an Egyptian temple, where the worshippers of Isis used to gather
for their fertility rites. The smell of roast meat and wine was transmuted into an
incense that drew us all into the same trance-like state, into the same experience of
leaving this world and entering an unknown dimension.
The string and wind instruments had given up, only the percussion played on.
Athena was dancing as if she were no longer there, with sweat running down her
face, her bare feet beating on the wooden floor. A woman got up and very gently
tied a scarf around her neck and breasts, because her blouse kept threatening to
slip off her shoulders. Athena, however, appeared not to notice; she was inhabiting
other spheres, experiencing the frontiers of worlds that almost touch ours, but
never reveal themselves.
The other people in the restaurant started clapping in time to the music, and
Athena was dancing ever faster, feeding on that energy, and spinning round and
round, balancing in the void, snatching up everything that we, poor mortals,
wanted to offer to the supreme divinity.
And suddenly she stopped. Everyone stopped, including the percussionists. Her
eyes were still closed, but tears were now rolling down her cheeks. She raised her
arms in the air and cried:
'When I die, bury me standing, because I've spent all my life on my knees!'
No one said anything. She opened her eyes as if waking from a deep sleep and
walked back to the table as if nothing had happened. The band started up again,
and couples took to the floor in an attempt to enjoy themselves, but the
atmosphere in the place had changed completely. People soon paid their bills and
started to leave the restaurant.
'Is everything all right?' I asked, when I saw that she'd recovered from the physical
effort of
dancing.
'I feel afraid. I discovered how to reach a place I don't want to go to.' 'Do you
want me to go with you?'
She shook her head.
In the days that followed, I completed my research for the documentary, sent my
interpreter back to Bucharest with the hired car, and then stayed on in Sibiu simply
because I wanted to meet her again. All my life I've always been guided by logic
and I know that love is something that can be built rather than simply discovered,
but I sensed that if I never saw her again, I would be leaving a very important part
of my life in Transylvania, even though I might only realise this later on. I fought
against the monotony of those endless hours; more than once, I went to the bus
station to find out the times of buses to Bucharest; I spent more than my tiny
budget as an independent film-maker allowed on phone-calls to the BBC and to
my girlfriend. I explained that I didn't yet have all the material I needed, that there
were still a few things lacking, that I might need another day or possibly a week; I
said that the Romanians were being very difficult and got upset if anyone
associated their beautiful Transylvania with the hideous story of Dracula. I finally
managed to convince the producers, and they let me stay on longer than I really
needed to.
We were staying in the only hotel in the city, and one day she saw me in the foyer
and seemed suddenly to remember our first encounter. This time, she invited me
out, and I tried to contain my joy. Perhaps I was important in her life.
saying.
Later on, I learned that the words she had spoken at the end of her dance were an
ancient gipsy
Liliana, seamstress, age and surname unknown
I speak in the present tense because for us time does not exist, only space. And
because it seems like only yesterday.
The one tribal custom I did not follow was that of having my man by my side
when Athena was born. The midwives came to me even though they knew I had
slept with a gadje, a foreigner. They loosened my hair, cut the umbilical cord, tied
various knots and handed it to me. At that point, tradition demands that the child
be wrapped in some item of the father's clothing; he had left a scarf which
reminded me of his smell and which I sometimes pressed to my nose so as to feel
him close to me, but now that perfume would vanish for ever.
I wrapped the baby in the scarf and placed her on the floor so that she would
receive energy from the Earth. I stayed there with her, not knowing what to feel or
think; my decision had been made.
The midwives told me to choose a name and not to tell anyone what it was – it
could only be pronounced once the child was baptised. They gave me the
consecrated oil and the amulets I must hang around her neck for the two weeks
following her birth. One of them told me not to worry, the whole tribe was
responsible for my child and although I would be the butt of much criticism, this
would soon pass. They also advised me not to go out between dusk and dawn
because the tsinvari (Editor's note: evil spirits) might attack us and take possession
of us, and from then on our lives would be a tragedy.
A week later, as soon as the sun rose, I went to an adoption centre in Sibiu and
placed her on the doorstep, hoping that some charitable person would take her in.
As I was doing so, a nurse caught me and dragged me inside. She insulted me in
every way she could and said that they were used to such behaviour, but that there
was always someone watching and I couldn't escape so easily from the
responsibility of bringing a child into the world.
'Although, of course, what else would one expect from a gipsy! Abandoning your
own child like
that!'
I was forced to fill in a form with all my details and, since I didn't know how to
write, she said again, more than once: 'Yes, well, what can you expect from a gipsy.
And don't try to trick us by giving false information. If you do, it could land you in
jail.' Out of pure fear, I told them the truth.
I looked at my child one last time, and all I could think was: 'Child without a name,
may you find love, much love in your life.'
Afterwards, I walked in the forest for hours. I remembered many nights during my
pregnancy when I had both loved and hated the child herself and the man who
had put her inside me.
Like all women, I'd dreamed of one day meeting an enchanted prince, who would
marry me, give me lots of children and shower attentions on my family. Like many
women, I fell in love with a man who could give me none of those things, but with
whom I shared some unforgettable moments, moments my child would never
understand, for she would always be stigmatised in our tribe as a gadje and a
fatherless child. I could bear that, but I didn't want her to suffer as I had suffered
ever since I first realised I was pregnant. I wept and tore at my own skin, thinking
that the pain of the scratches would perhaps stop me thinking about a return to
ordinary life, to face the shame I had brought on the tribe. Someone would take
care of the child, and I would always cherish the hope of seeing her again one day,
when she had grown up.
Unable to stop crying, I sat down on the ground and put my arms around the
trunk of a tree. However, as soon as my tears and the blood from my wounds
touched the trunk of the tree, a strange calm took hold of me. I seemed to hear a
voice telling me not to worry, saying that my blood and my tears had purified the
path of the child and lessened my suffering. Ever since then, whenever I despair, I
remember that voice and feel calm again.
That's why I wasn't surprised when I saw her arrive with our tribe's Rom Baro,
who asked me for a coffee and a drink, then smiled slyly and left. The voice told
me that she would come back, and now here she is, in front of me. She's pretty.
She looks like her father. I don't know what feelings she has for me; perhaps she
hates me because I abandoned her. I don't need to explain why I did what I did;
no one would ever understand.
We sit for an age without saying anything to each other, just looking – not smiling,
not crying, nothing. A surge of love rises up from the depths of my soul, but I
don't know if she's interested in what I feel.
'Are you hungry? Would you like something to eat?'
Instinct. Instinct above all else. She nods. We go into the small room in which I
live, and which is living room, bedroom, kitchen and sewing workshop. She looks
around, shocked, but I pretend not to notice. I go over to the stove and return
with two bowls of thick meat and vegetable broth. I've prepared some strong
coffee too and just as I'm about to add sugar, she speaks for the first time:
'No sugar for me, thank you. I didn't know you spoke English.'
I almost say that I learned it from her father, but I bite my tongue. We eat in
silence and, as time passes, everything starts to feel familiar to me; here I am with
my daughter; she went off into the world and now she's back; she followed
different paths from mine and has come home. I know this is an illusion, but life
has given me so many moments of harsh reality that it does no harm to dream a
little.
'Who's that saint?' she asks, pointing to a painting on the wall.
'St Sarah, the patron saint of gipsies. I've always wanted to visit her church in
France, but I can't leave the country. I'd never get a passport or permission…'
I'm about to say: And even if I did, I wouldn't have enough money, but I stop
myself in time. She might think I was asking her for something.
'…and besides I have too much work to do.'
Silence falls again. She finishes her soup, lights a cigarette, and her eyes give
nothing away, no
emotion.
'Did you think you would ever see me again?'
I say that I did, and that I'd heard yesterday, from the Rom Baro's wife, that she'd
visited his restaurant.
'A storm is coming. Wouldn't you like to sleep a little?'
'I can't hear anything. The wind isn't blowing any harder or softer than before. I'd
rather talk.' 'Believe me, I have all the time in the world. I have the rest of my life
to spend by your side.' 'Don't say that.'
'But you're tired,' I go on, pretending not to have heard her remark. I can see the
storm approaching. Like all storms, it brings destruction, but, at the same time, it
soaks the fields, and the wisdom of the heavens falls with the rain. Like all storms,
it will pass. The more violent it is, the more quickly it will pass.
I have, thank God, learned to weather storms.
And as if all the Holy Marys of the Sea were listening to me, the first drops of rain
begin to fall on the tin roof. The young woman finishes her cigarette. I take her
hand and lead her to my bed. She lies down and closes her eyes.
I don't know how long she slept. I watched her without thinking anything, and the
voice I'd heard once in the forest was telling me that all was well, that I needn't
worry, that the ways in which fate changes people are always favourable if we only
know how to decipher them. I don't know who saved her from the orphanage and
brought her up and made her into the independent woman she appears to be. I
offered up a prayer to that family who had allowed my daughter to survive and
achieve a better life. In the middle of the prayer, I felt jealousy, despair, regret, and
I stopped talking to St Sarah. Had it really been so important to bring her back?
There lay everything I'd lost and could never recover.
But there, too, was the physical manifestation of my love. I knew nothing and yet
everything was revealed to me: I remembered the times I'd considered suicide and,
later, abortion, when I'd imagined leaving that part of the world and setting off on
foot to wherever my strength would take me; I remembered my blood and tears on
the tree trunk, the dialogue with nature that had intensified from that moment on
and has never left me since, although few people in my tribe have any inkling of
this. My protector, whom I met while I was wandering in the forest, understood,
but he had just died.
'The light is unstable, the wind blows it out, the lightning ignites it, it is never
simply there, shining like the sun, but it is worth fighting for,' he used to say.
He was the only person who accepted me and persuaded the tribe that I could
once again form part of their world. He was the only one with the moral authority
to ensure that I wasn't expelled.
And, alas, the only one who would never meet my daughter. I wept for him, while
she lay sleeping on my bed, she who must be used to all the world's comforts.
Thousands of questions filled my head – who were her adoptive parents, where did
she live, had she been to university, was there someone she loved, what were her
plans? But I wasn't the one who had travelled the world in search of her, on the
contrary. I wasn't there to ask questions, but to answer them.
She opened her eyes. I wanted to touch her hair, to give her the affection I'd kept
locked inside all these years, but I wasn't sure how she would react and thought it
best to do nothing.
'You came here to find out why–'
'No, I don't want to know why a mother would abandon her daughter. There is no
reason for anyone to do that.'
Her words wound my heart, but I don't know how to respond.
'Who am I? What blood runs in my veins? Yesterday, when I found out where you
were, I was absolutely terrified. Where do I start? I suppose, like all gipsies, you can
read the future in the cards.'
'No, that's not true. We only do that with gadje as a way of earning a living. We
never read cards or hands or try to predict the future within our own tribe. And
you…'
'…I'm part of the tribe. Even though the woman who brought me into the world
sent me far away.' 'Yes.'
'So what am I doing here? Now that I've seen your face I can go back to London.
My holidays are nearly over.'
mouth:
hours.
'Do you want to know about your father?' 'No, I haven't the slightest interest in
him.'
And suddenly, I realised that I could help her. It was as if someone else's voice
came out of my
'Try to understand the blood that flows in my veins and in your heart.'
That was my teacher speaking through me. She closed her eyes again and slept for
nearly twelve
The following day, I took her to the outskirts of Sibiu where there's a kind of
museum of the different kinds of houses found in the region. For the first time, I'd
had the pleasure of preparing her breakfast. She was more rested, less tense, and
she asked me questions about gipsy culture, but never about me. She told me a
little of her life. I learned that I was a grandmother! She didn't mention her
husband or her adoptive parents. She said she sold land in a country far from
there and that she would soon return to her work.
I explained that I could show her how to make amulets to ward off evil, but she
didn't seem interested. However, when I spoke to her about the healing properties
of herbs, she asked me to teach her how to recognise them. In the park where we
were walking, I tried to pass on to her all the knowledge I possessed, although I
was sure she'd forget everything as soon as she returned to her home country,
which by then I knew was England.
'We don't possess the Earth, the Earth possesses us. We used to travel constantly,
and everything around us was ours: the plants, the water, the landscapes through
which our caravans passed. Our laws were nature's laws: the strong survived, and
we, the weak, the eternal exiles, learned to hide our strength and to use it only
when necessary. We don't believe that God made the universe. We believe that
God is the universe and that we are contained in Him, and He in us. Although…'
I stopped, then decided to go on, because it was a way of paying homage to my
protector.
'…in my opinion, we should call “Him” “Goddess” or “Mother”. Not like the
woman who gives her daughter up to an orphanage, but like the Woman in all of
us, who protects us when we are in danger. She will always be with us while we
perform our daily tasks with love and joy, understanding that nothing is suffering,
that everything is a way of praising Creation.'
Athena – now I knew her name – looked across at one of the houses in the park.
'What's that? A church?'
The hours I'd spent by her side had allowed me to recover my strength. I asked if
she was trying to change the subject. She thought for a moment before replying.
'No, I want to go on listening to what you have to tell me, although, according to
everything I read before I came here, what you're saying isn't part of the gipsy
tradition.'
'My protector taught me these things. He knew things the gipsies don't know and
he made the tribe take me back. And as I learned from him, I gradually became
aware of the power of the Mother, I, who had rejected the blessing of being a
mother.'
I pointed at a small bush.
'If one day your son has a fever, place him next to a young plant like this and
shake its leaves. The fever will pass over into the plant. If ever you feel anxious,
do the same thing.'
'I'd rather you told me more about your protector.'
'He taught me that in the beginning Creation was so lonely that it created someone
else to talk to. Those two creatures, in an act of love, made a third person, and
from then on, they multiplied by thousands and millions. You asked about the
church we just saw: I don't know when it was built and I'm not interested. My
temple is the park, the sky, the water in the lake and the stream that feeds it. My
people are those who share my ideas and not those I'm bound to by bonds of
blood. My ritual is being with those people and celebrating everything around me.
When are you thinking of going home?'
'Possibly tomorrow. I don't want to inconvenience you.' Another wound to my
heart, but I could say nothing.
'No, please, stay as long as you like. I only asked because I'd like to celebrate your
arrival with the others. If you agree, I can do this tonight.'
She says nothing, and I understand this as a 'yes'. Back home, I give her more
food, and she explains that she needs to go to her hotel in Sibiu to fetch some
clothes. By the time she returns, I have everything organised. We go to a hill to the
south of the town; we sit around a fire that has just been lit; we play instruments,
we sing, we dance, we tell stories. She watches, but doesn't take part, although the
Rom Baro told me that she was a fine dancer. For the first time in many years, I
feel happy, because I've had the chance to prepare a ritual for my daughter and to
celebrate with her the miracle of the two of us being together, alive and healthy
and immersed in the love of the Great Mother.
Afterwards, she says that she'll sleep at the hotel that night. I ask her if this is
goodbye, but she says it isn't. She'll come back tomorrow.
For a whole week, my daughter and I share together the adoration of the Universe.
One night, she brought a friend, making it quite clear that he was neither her
boyfriend nor the father of her child. The man, who must have been ten years
older than her, asked who we were worshipping in our rituals. I explained that
worshipping someone means – according to my protector – placing that person
outside our world. We are not worshipping anyone or anything; we are simply
communing with Creation.
'But do you pray?'
'Myself, I pray to St Sarah, but here we are part of everything and we celebrate
rather than pray.' I felt that Athena was proud of my answer, but I was really only
repeating my protector's words. 'And why do this in a group, when we can all
celebrate the Universe on our own?'
'Because the others are me. And I am the others.'
Athena looked at me then, and I felt it was my turn to wound her heart. 'I'm
leaving tomorrow,' she said.
'Before you do, come and say goodbye to your mother.'
That was the first time, in all those days, I had used the word. My voice didn't
tremble, my gaze was steady, and I knew that, despite everything, standing before
me was the blood of my blood, the fruit of my womb. At that moment, I was
behaving like a little girl who has just found out that the world isn't full of ghosts
and curses, as grown-ups have taught us. It's full of love, regardless of how that
love is manifested, a love that forgives our mistakes and redeems our sins.
She gave me a long embrace. Then she adjusted the veil I wear to cover my hair; I
may not have had a husband, but according to gipsy tradition, I had to wear a veil
because I was no longer a virgin. What would tomorrow bring me, along with the
departure of the being I've always both loved and feared from a distance? I was
everyone, and everyone was me and my solitude.
The following day, Athena arrived bearing a bunch of flowers. She tidied my room,
told me that I should wear glasses because my eyes were getting worn out from all
that sewing. She asked if the friends I celebrated with experienced any problems
with the tribe, and I told her that they didn't, that my protector had been a very
respected man, had taught us many things and had followers all over the world. I
explained that he'd died shortly before she arrived.
'One day, a cat brushed against him. To us, that means death, and we were all very
worried. But although there is a ritual that can lift such a curse, my protector said it
was time for him to leave, that he needed to travel to those other worlds which he
knew existed, to be reborn as a child, and to rest for a while in the arms of the
Mother. His funeral took place in a forest nearby. It was a very simple affair, but
people came from all over the world.'
'Amongst those people, was there a woman of about thirty-five, with dark hair?' 'I
can't be sure, but possibly. Why do you ask'
'I met someone at a hotel in Bucharest who said that she'd come to attend the
funeral of a friend. I think she said something about “her teacher”.'
She asked me to tell her more about the gipsies, but there wasn't much she didn't
already know, mainly because, apart from customs and traditions, we know little of
our own history. I suggested that she go to France one day and take, on my behalf,
a shawl to present to the image of St Sarah in the little French village of
Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer.
'I came here because there was something missing in my life,' she said. 'I needed to
fill up my blank spaces, and I thought just seeing your face would be enough. But
it wasn't. I also needed to understand that…I was loved.'
'You are loved.'
I said nothing else for a long time. I'd finally put into words what I'd wanted to say
ever since I let her go. So that she would not become too emotional, I went on:
'I'd like to ask you something.' 'Ask me anything you like.'
'I want to ask your forgiveness.' She bit her lip.
'I've always been a very restless person. I work hard, spend too much time looking
after my son, I dance like a mad thing, I learned calligraphy, I go to courses on
selling, I read one book after another. But that's all a way of avoiding those
moments when nothing is happening, because those blank spaces give me a
feeling of absolute emptiness, in which not a single crumb of love exists. My
parents have always done everything they could for me, and I do nothing but
disappoint them. But here, during the time we've spent together, celebrating nature
and the Great Mother, I've realised that those empty spaces were starting to get
filled up. They were transformed into pauses – the moment when the man lifts his
hand from the drum before bringing it down again to strike it hard. I think I can
leave now. I'm not saying that I'll go in peace, because my life needs to follow the
rhythm I'm accustomed to. But I won't leave feeling bitter. Do all gipsies believe in
the Great Mother?'
'If you were to ask them, none of them would say “yes”. They've adopted the
beliefs and customs of the places where they've settled, and the only thing that
unites us in religious terms is the worship of St Sarah and making a pilgrimage, at
least once in our lifetime, to visit her tomb in Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer. Some
tribes call her Kali Sarah, Black Sarah. Or the Virgin of the Gipsies, as she's known
in Lourdes.'
'I have to go,' Athena said after a while. 'The friend you met the other day is
leaving with me.' 'He seems like a nice man.'
'You're talking like a mother.' 'I am your mother.'
'And I'm your daughter.'
She embraced me, this time with tears in her eyes. I stroked her hair as I held her
in my arms, as I'd always dreamed I would, ever since the day when fate – or my
fear – separated us. I asked her to take good care of herself, and she told me that
she had learned a lot.
'You'll learn a lot more too because, although, nowadays, we're all trapped in
houses, cities and jobs, there still flows in your blood the time of caravans and
journeyings and the teachings that the Great Mother placed in our path so that we
could survive. Learn, but always learn with other people by your side. Don't be
alone in the search, because if you take a wrong step, you'll have no one there to
help put you right.'
She was still crying, still clinging to me, almost begging me to let her stay. I pleaded
with my protector not to let me shed one tear, because I wanted the best for
Athena, and her destiny was to go forward. Here in Transylvania, apart from my
love, she would find nothing else. And although I believe that love is enough to
justify a whole existence, I was quite sure that I couldn't ask her to sacrifice her
future in order to stay by my side.
Athena planted a kiss on my forehead and left without saying goodbye, perhaps
thinking she would return one day. Every Christmas, she sent me enough money
to spend the whole year without having to sew, but I never went to the bank to
cash her cheques, even though everyone in the tribe thought I was behaving like a
foolish woman.
Six months ago, she stopped sending money. She must have realised that I need
my sewing to fill up what she called the 'blank spaces'.
I would love to see her again, but I know she'll never come back. She's probably a
big executive now, married to the man she loves. And I probably have lots of
grandchildren, which means that my blood will remain on this Earth, and my
mistakes will be forgiven.
Samira R. Khalil, housewife
As soon as Sherine arrived home, whooping with joy and clutching a rather startled
Viorel to her, I knew that everything had gone much better than I'd imagined. I felt
that God had heard my prayers, and that now she no longer had anything more to
learn about herself, she would finally adapt to normal life, bring up her child,
remarry and forget all about the strange restlessness that left her simultaneously
euphoric and depressed.
'I love you, Mum.'
It was my turn to put my arms around her and hold her to me. During all the
nights she'd been away, I had, I confess, been terrified by the thought that she
might send someone to fetch Viorel and then they would never come back.
After she'd eaten, had a bath, told us about the meeting with her birth mother, and
described the Transylvanian countryside (I could barely remember it, since all I was
interested in, at the time, was finding the orphanage), I asked her when she was
going back to Dubai.
'Next week, but, first, I have to go to Scotland to see someone.' A man!
'A woman,' she said at once, perhaps in response to my knowing smile. 'I feel that
I have a mission. While we were celebrating life and nature, I discovered things I
didn't even know existed. What I thought could be found only through dance is
everywhere. And it has the face of a woman. I saw in the…'
I felt frightened. Her mission, I told her, was to bring up her son, do well at her
job, earn more money, remarry, and respect God as we know Him.
But Sherine wasn't listening.
'It was one night when we were sitting round the fire, drinking, telling funny stories
and listening to music. Apart from in the restaurant, I hadn't felt the need to dance
all the time I was there, as if I were storing up energy for something different.
Suddenly, I felt as if everything around me were alive and pulsating, as if the
Creation and I were one and the same thing. I wept with joy when the flames of
the fire seemed to take on the form of a woman's face, full of compassion, smiling
at me.'
I shuddered. It was probably gipsy witchcraft. And at the same time, the image
came back to me of the little girl at school, who said she'd seen 'a woman in white'.
'Don't get caught up in things like that, they're the Devil's work. We've always set
you a good example, so why can't you lead a normal life?'
I'd obviously been too hasty when I thought the journey in search of her birth
mother had done her good. However, instead of reacting aggressively, as she
usually did, she smiled and went on:
'What is normal? Why is Dad always laden down with work, when we have money
enough to support three generations? He's an honest man and he deserves the
money he earns, but he always says, with a certain pride, that he's got far too much
work. Why? What for?'
'He's a man who lives a dignified, hard-working life.'
'When I lived at home, the first thing he'd ask me when he got back every evening
was how my homework was going, and he'd give me a few examples illustrating
how important his work was to the world. Then he'd turn on the TV, make a few
comments about the political situation in Lebanon, and read some technical book
before going to sleep. But he was always busy. And it was the same thing with you.
I was the best-dressed girl at school; you took me to parties; you kept the house
spick and span; you were always kind and loving and brought me up impeccably.
But what happens now that you're getting older? What are you going to do with
your life now that I've grown up and am independent?'
'We're going to travel the world and enjoy a well-earned rest.' 'But why don't you
do that now, while your health is still good?'
I'd asked myself the same question, but I felt that my husband needed his work,
not because of the money, but out of a need to feel useful, to prove that an exile
also honours his commitments. Whenever he took a holiday and stayed in town,
he always found some excuse to slip into the office, to talk to his colleagues and
make some decision that could easily have waited. I tried to make him go to the
theatre, to
the cinema, to museums, and he'd do as I asked, but I always had the feeling that it
bored him. His only interest was the company, work, business.
For the first time, I talked to her as if she were a friend and not my daughter, but I
chose my words carefully and spoke in a way that she could understand.
'Are you saying that your father is also trying to fill in what you call the “blank
spaces”?'
'The day he retires, although I really don't think that day will ever come, he'll fall
into a deep depression. I'm sure of it. What to do with that hard-won freedom?
Everyone will congratulate him on a brilliant career, on the legacy he leaves behind
him because of the integrity with which he ran his company, but no one will have
time for him any more – life flows on, and everyone is caught up in that flow. Dad
will feel an exile again, but this time he won't have a country where he can seek
refuge.'
'Have you got a better idea?'
'Only one: I don't want the same thing to happen to me. I'm too restless, and,
please don't take this the wrong way, because I'm not blaming you and Dad at all
for the example you set me, but I need to change, and change fast.'
Deidre O'Neill, known as Edda She's sitting in the pitch black.
The boy, of course, left the room at once – the night is the kingdom of terror, of
monsters from the past, of the days when we wandered like gipsies, like my former
teacher – may the Mother has mercy on his soul, and may he be loved and
cherished until it is time for him to return.
Athena hasn't known what to do since I switched off the light. She asks about her
son, and I tell her not to worry, to leave everything to me. I go out, put the TV on,
find a cartoon channel and turn off the sound; the child sits there hypnotised –
problem solved. I wonder how it must have been in the past, because the women
who came to perform the same ritual Athena is about to take part in would have
brought their children and in those days there was no TV. What did teachers do
then?
Fortunately, I don't have to worry about that.
What the boy is experiencing in front of the television – a gateway into a different
reality – is the same state I am going to induce in Athena. Everything is at once so
simple and so complicated! It's simple because all it takes is a change of attitude:
I'm not going to look for happiness any more. From now on, I'm independent; I
see life through my eyes and not through other people's. I'm going in search of the
adventure of being alive.
And it's complicated: why am I not looking for happiness when everyone has
taught me that happiness is the only goal worth pursuing? Why am I going to risk
taking a path that no one else is taking? After all, what is happiness?
Love, they tell me. But love doesn't bring and never has brought happiness. On
the contrary, it's a constant state of anxiety, a battlefield; it's sleepless nights, asking
ourselves all the time if we're doing the right thing. Real love is composed of
ecstasy and agony.
All right then, peace. Peace? If we look at the Mother, she's never at peace. The
winter does battle with the summer, the sun and the moon never meet, the tiger
chases the man, who's afraid of the dog, who chases the cat, who chases the
mouse, who frightens the man.
Money brings happiness. Fine. In that case, everyone who earns enough to have a
high standard of living would be able to stop work. But then they're more troubled
than ever, as if they were afraid of losing everything. Money attracts money, that's
true. Poverty might bring unhappiness, but money won't necessarily bring
happiness.
I spent a lot of my life looking for happiness, now what I want is joy. Joy is like
sex – it begins and ends. I want pleasure. I want to be contented, but happiness? I
no longer fall into that trap.
When I'm with a group of people and I want to provoke them by asking that most
important of questions: 'Are you happy?', they all reply: 'Yes, I am.'
Then I ask: 'But don't you want more? Don't you want to keep on growing?' And
they all reply: 'Of
course.'
Then I say: 'So you're not happy.' And they change the subject.
I must go back to the room where Athena is sitting. It's dark. She hears my
footsteps; a match is struck and a candle lit.
'We're surrounded by Universal Desire. It's not happiness; it's desire. And desires
are never satisfied, because once they are, they cease to be desires.'
'Where's my son?'
'Your son is fine; he's watching TV. I just want you to look at the candle; don't
speak, don't say anything. Just believe.'
'Believe what?'
'I asked you not to say anything. Simply believe – don't doubt anything. You're
alive, and this candle is the only point in your universe. Believe in that. Let go of
the idea that the path will lead you to your goal. The truth is that with each step we
take, we arrive. Repeat that to yourself every morning: “I've arrived”. That way
you'll find it much easier to stay in touch with each second of your day.'
I paused.
'The candle flame is illuminating your world. Ask the candle: “Who am I?”' I
paused again, then went on:
'I can imagine your answer. I'm so-and-so. I've had these experiences. I have a
son. I work in Dubai. Now ask the candle again: “Who am I not?”'
Again I waited and again I went on:
'You probably said: I'm not a contented person. I'm not a typical mother
concerned only with her son and her husband, with having a house and a garden
and a place to spend the summer holidays. Is that so? You can speak now.'
'Yes, it is.'
'Good, we're on the right path. You, like me, are a dissatisfied person. Your
“reality” does not coincide with the “reality” of other people. And you're afraid that
your son will follow the same path as you, is that correct?'
'Yes.'
'Nevertheless, you know you cannot stop. You struggle, but you can't control your
doubts. Look hard at the candle. At the moment, the candle is your universe. It
fixes your attention; it lights up the room around you a little. Breathe deeply, hold
the air in your lungs as long as possible and then breathe out. Repeat this five
times.'
She obeyed.
'This exercise should have calmed your soul. Now, remember what I said: believe.
Believe in your abilities; believe that you have already arrived where you wanted to
arrive. At a particular moment in your life, as you told me over tea this afternoon,
you said that you'd changed the behaviour of the people in the bank where you
worked because you'd taught them to dance. That isn't true. You changed
everything because, through dance, you changed their reality. You believed in the
story of the Vertex, which, although I've never heard of it before, seems to me an
interesting one. You like dancing and you believed in what you were doing. You
can't believe in something you don't like, can you?'
Athena shook her head, keeping her eyes fixed on the candle flame.
'Faith is not desire. Faith is Will. Desires are things that need to be satisfied,
whereas Will is a force. Will changes the space around us, as you did with your
work at the bank. But for that, you also need Desire. Please, concentrate on the
candle!
'Your son left the room and went to watch TV because he's afraid of the dark. But
why? We can project anything onto the darkness, and we usually project our own
ghosts. That's true for children and for adults. Slowly raise your right arm.'
She raised her arm. I asked her to do the same with her left arm. I looked at her
breasts, far prettier than mine.
'Now slowly lower them again. Close your eyes and breathe deeply. I'm going to
turn on the light. Right, that's the end of the ritual. Let's go into the living room.'
adopt.
She got up with some difficulty. Her legs had gone numb because of the position
I'd told her to
Viorel had fallen asleep. I turned off the TV, and we went into the kitchen. 'What
was the point of all that?' she asked.
'Merely to remove you from everyday reality. I could have asked you to
concentrate on anything, but I like the darkness and the candle flame. But you
want to know what I'm up to, isn't that right?'
Athena remarked that she'd travelled for nearly five hours in the train with her son
on her lap, when she should have been packing her bags to go back to work. She
could have sat looking at a candle in her own room without any need to come to
Scotland at all.
'Yes, there was a need,' I replied. 'You needed to know that you're not alone, that
other people are in contact with the same thing as you. Just knowing that allows
you to believe.'
'To believe what?'
'That you're on the right path. And, as I said before, arriving with each step you
take.'
'What path? I thought that by going to find my mother in Romania, I would, at
last, find the peace of mind I so need, but I haven't. What path are you talking
about?'
'I haven't the slightest idea. You'll only discover that when you start to teach. When
you go back to Dubai, find a student.'
'Do you mean teach dance or calligraphy?'
'Those are things you know about already. You need to teach what you don't
know, what the Mother wants to reveal through you.'
She looked at me as if I had gone mad.
'It's true,' I said. 'Why else do you think I asked you to breathe deeply and to raise
your arms? So that you'd believe that I knew more than you. But it isn't true. It was
just a way of taking you out of the world you're accustomed to. I didn't ask you to
thank the Mother, to say how wonderful She is or that you saw Her face shining in
the flames of a fire. I asked only that absurd and pointless gesture of raising your
arms and focusing your attention on a candle. That's enough – trying, whenever
possible, to do something that is out of kilter with the reality around us.
'When you start creating rituals for your student to carry out, you'll be receiving
guidance. That's where the apprenticeship begins, or so my protector told me. If
you want to heed my words, fine, but if you don't and you carry on with your life
as it is at the moment, you'll end up bumping up against a wall called
“dissatisfaction”.'
I rang for a taxi, and we talked a little about fashion and men, and then Athena
left. I was sure she would listen to me, mainly because she was the kind of person
who never refuses a challenge.
'Teach people to be different. That's all!' I shouted after her, as the taxi moved off.
That is joy. Happiness would be feeling satisfied with everything she already had –
a lover, a son, a job. And Athena, like me, wasn't born for that kind of life.
Heron Ryan, journalist
I couldn't admit I was in love, of course; I already had a girlfriend who loved me
and shared with me both my troubles and my joys.
The various encounters and events that had taken place in Sibiu were part of a
journey, and it wasn't the first time this kind of thing had happened while I was
away from home. When we step out of our normal world and leave behind us all
the usual barriers and prejudices, we tend to become more adventurous.
When I returned to England, the first thing I did was to tell the producers that
making a documentary about the historical figure of Dracula was a nonsense, and
that one book by a mad Irishman had created a truly terrible image of
Transylvania, which was, in fact, one of the loveliest places on the planet.
Obviously the producers were none too pleased, but at that point, I didn't care
what they thought. I left television and went to work for one of the world's most
prestigious newspapers.
That was when I began to realise that I wanted to meet Athena again.
I phoned her and we arranged to go for a walk together before she went back to
Dubai. She suggested guiding me around London.
We got on the first bus that stopped, without asking where it was going, then we
chose a female passenger at random and decided that we would get off wherever
she did. She got off at Temple and so did we. We passed a beggar who asked us
for money, but we didn't give him any and walked on, listening to the insults he
hurled after us, accepting that this was merely his way of communicating with us.
We saw someone vandalising a telephone box, and I wanted to call the police, but
Athena stopped me; perhaps that person had just broken up with the love of his
life and needed to vent his feelings. Or, who knows, perhaps he had no one to talk
to and couldn't stand to see others humiliating him by using that phone to discuss
business deals or love.
She told me to close my eyes and to describe exactly the clothes we were both
wearing; to my surprise, I got nearly every detail wrong.
She asked me what was on my desk at work and said that some of the papers were
only there because I was too lazy to deal with them.
'Have you ever considered that those bits of paper have a life and feelings, have
requests to make and stories to tell? I don't think you're giving life the attention it
deserves.'
I promised that I'd go through them one by one when I returned to work the
following day.
A foreign couple with a map asked Athena how to get to a particular tourist spot.
She gave them very precise, but totally inaccurate directions.
'Everything you told them was completely wrong!'
'It doesn't matter. They'll get lost, and that's the best way to discover interesting
places. Try to fill your life again with a little fantasy; above our heads is a sky about
which the whole of humanity – after thousands of years spent observing it – has
given various apparently reasonable explanations. Forget everything you've ever
learned about the stars and they'll once more be transformed into angels, or into
children, or into whatever you want to believe at that moment. It won't make you
more stupid – after all, it's only a game – but it could enrich your life.'
The following day, when I went back to work, I treated each sheet of paper as if it
were a message addressed to me personally and not to the organisation I represent.
At midday, I went to talk to the deputy editor and suggested writing an article about
the Goddess worshipped by the gipsies. He thought it an excellent idea and I was
commissioned to go to the celebrations in the gipsy Mecca,
Saintes-Maries-de-laMer.
Incredible though it may seem, Athena showed no desire to go with me. She said
that her boyfriend that fictitious policeman, whom she was using to keep me at a
distance – wouldn't be very happy if she went off travelling with another man.
'Didn't you promise your mother to take the saint a new shawl?'
'Yes, I did, but only if the town happened to be on my path, which it isn't. If I do
ever pass by there, then I'll keep my promise.'
She was returning to Dubai the following Sunday, but first she travelled up to
Scotland with her son to see the woman we'd both met in Bucharest. I didn't
remember anyone, but, perhaps the phantom 'woman in Scotland', like the
phantom 'boyfriend', was another excuse, and I decided not to insist. But I
nevertheless felt jealous, as if she were telling me that she preferred being with
other people.
I found my jealousy odd. And I decided that if I was asked to go to the Middle
East to write an article about the property boom that someone on the business
pages had mentioned, I would read up everything I could on real estate,
economics, politics and oil, simply as a way of getting closer to Athena.
My visit to Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer produced an excellent article. According to
tradition, Sarah was a gipsy who happened to be living in the small seaside town
when Jesus' aunt, Mary Salome, along with other refugees, arrived there fleeing
persecution by the Romans. Sarah helped them and, in the end, converted to
Christianity.
During the celebrations, bones from the skeletons of the two women who are
buried beneath the altar are taken out of a reliquary and raised up on high to bless
the multitude of gipsies who arrive in their caravans from all over Europe with
their bright clothes and their music. Then the image of Sarah, decked out in
splendid robes, is brought from the place near the church where it's kept – for
Sarah has never been canonised by the Vatican – and carried in procession to the
sea through narrow streets strewn with rose petals. Four gipsies in traditional
costume place the relics in a boat full of flowers and wade into the water,
re-enacting the arrival of the fugitives and their meeting with Sarah. From then on,
it's all music,
celebration, songs and bull-running.
A historian, Antoine Locadour, helped me flesh out the article with interesting facts
about the Female Divinity. I sent Athena the two pages I'd written for the
newspaper's travel section. All I received in return was a friendly reply, thanking
me for sending her the article, but with no other comment.
At least, I'd confirmed that her address in Dubai existed.
Antoine Locadour, 74, historian, ICP, France
It's easy to label Sarah as just one of the many Black Virgins in the world.
According to tradition, Sarah-la-Kali was of noble lineage and knew the secrets of
the world. She is, I believe, one more manifestation of what people call the Great
Mother, the Goddess of Creation.
And it doesn't surprise me in the least that more and more people are becoming
interested in pagan traditions. Why? Because God the Father is associated with the
rigour and discipline of worship, whereas the Mother Goddess shows the
importance of love above and beyond all the usual prohibitions and taboos.
The phenomenon is hardly a new one. Whenever a religion tightens its rules, a
significant number of people break away and go in search of more freedom in
their search for spiritual contact. This happened during the Middle Ages when the
Catholic Church did little more than impose taxes and build splendid monasteries
and convents; the phenomenon known as 'witchcraft' was a reaction to this, and
even though it was suppressed because of its revolutionary nature, it left behind it
roots and traditions that have managed to survive over the centuries.
According to pagan tradition, nature worship is more important than reverence for
sacred books. The Goddess is in everything and everything is part of the Goddess.
The world is merely an expression of her goodness. There are many philosophical
systems – such as Taoism and Buddhism – which make no distinction between
creator and creature. People no longer try to decipher the mystery of life, but
choose instead to be part of it. There is no female figure in Taoism or Buddhism,
but there, too, the central idea is that 'everything is one'.
In the worship of the Great Mother, what we call 'sin', usually a transgression of
certain arbitrary moral codes, ceases to exist. Sex and customs in general are freer
because they are part of nature and cannot be considered to be the fruits of evil.
The new paganism shows that man is capable of living without an institutionalised
religion, while still continuing the spiritual search in order to justify his existence. If
God is Mother, then we need only gather together with other people and adore
Her through rituals intended to satisfy the female soul, rituals involving dance, fire,
water, air, earth, songs, music, flowers and beauty.
This has been a growing trend over the last few years. We may be witnessing a
very important moment in the history of the world, when the Spirit finally merges
with the Material, and the two are united and transformed. At the same time, I
imagine that there will be a very violent reaction from organised religious
institutions, which are beginning to lose their followers. There will be a rise in
fundamentalism.
As a historian, I'm content to collate all the data and analyse this confrontation
between the freedom to worship and the duty to obey, between the God who
controls the world and the Goddess who is part of the world, between people who
join together in groups where celebration is a spontaneous affair and those who
close ranks and learn only what they should and should not do.
I'd like to be optimistic and believe that human beings have at last found their path
to the spiritual world, but the signs are not very positive. As so often in the past, a
new conservative backlash could once more stifle the cult of the Mother.
Andrea McCain, actress
It's very difficult to be impartial and to tell a story that began in admiration and
ended in rancour, but I'm going to try, yes, I'm really going to try and describe the
Athena I met for the first time in an apartment in Victoria Street.
She'd just got back from Dubai with plenty of money and a desire to share
everything she knew about the mysteries of magic. This time, she'd spent only four
months in the Middle East: she sold some land for the construction of two
supermarkets, earned a huge commission and decided that she'd earned enough
money to support herself and her son for the next three years, and that she could
always resume work later on if she wanted. Now was the time to make the most of
the present, to live what remained of her youth and to teach others everything she
had learned.
She received me somewhat unenthusiastically: 'What do you want?'
'I work in the theatre and we're putting on a play about the female face of God. I
heard from a journalist friend that you spent time in the Balkan mountains with
some gipsies and would be prepared to tell me about your experiences there.'
'You mean you only came here to learn about the Mother because of a play?' 'Why
did you learn about Her?'
Athena stopped, looked me up and down, and smiled:
'You're right. That's my first lesson as a teacher: teach those who want to learn.
The reason doesn't
matter.'
'I'm sorry?' 'Nothing.'
'The origins of the theatre are sacred,' I went on. 'It began in Greece with hymns
to Dionysus, the god of wine, rebirth and fertility. But it's believed that even from
very remote times, people performed a ritual in which they would pretend to be
someone else as a way of communing with the sacred.'
'Second lesson, thank you.'
'I don't understand. I came here to learn, not to teach.'
This woman was beginning to irritate me. Perhaps she was being ironic. 'My
protector–'
'Your protector?'
'I'll explain another time. My protector said that I would only learn what I need to
learn if I were provoked into it. And since my return from Dubai, you're the first
person to demonstrate that to me. What she said makes sense.'
I explained that, in researching the play, I'd gone from one teacher to the next, but
had never found their teachings to be in any way exceptional; despite this,
however, I grew more and more interested in the matter as I went on. I also
mentioned that these people had seemed confused and uncertain about what they
wanted.
'For example?'
Sex, for example. In some of the places I went to, sex was a complete no-no. In
others, they not only advocated complete freedom, but even encouraged orgies.
She asked for more details, and I couldn't tell if she was doing this in order to test
me or because she had no idea what other people got up to.
Athena spoke before I could answer her question.
'When you dance, do you feel desire? Do you feel as if you were summoning up a
greater energy? When you dance, are there moments when you cease to be
yourself?'
I didn't know what to say. In nightclubs or at parties in friends' houses, sensuality
was definitely part of how I felt when I danced. I would start by flirting and
enjoying the desire in men's eyes, but as the night wore on, I seemed to get more
in touch with myself, and it was no longer important to me whether I was or wasn't
seducing someone.
Athena continued:
'If theatre is ritual, then dance is too. Moreover, it's a very ancient way of getting
close to a partner. It's as if the threads connecting us to the rest of the world were
washed clean of preconceptions and fears. When you dance, you can enjoy the
luxury of being you.'
I started listening to her with more respect.
'Afterwards, we go back to being who we were before – frightened people trying to
be more important than we actually believe we are.'
That was exactly how I felt. Or is it the same for everyone? 'Do you have a
boyfriend?'
I remembered that in one of the places where I'd gone to learn about the Gaia
tradition, a 'druid' had asked me to make love in front of him. Ridiculous and
frightening – how dare these people use the spiritual search for their own more
sinister ends?
'Do you have a boyfriend?' she asked again. 'I do.'
Athena said nothing else. She merely put her finger to her lips, indicating that I
should remain silent. And suddenly I realised that it was extremely difficult for me
to remain silent in the presence of someone I'd only just met. The norm is to talk
about something, anything – the weather, the traffic, the best restaurants to go to.
We were sitting on the sofa in her completely white sitting room, with a CD-player
and a small shelf of CDs. There were no books anywhere, and no paintings on the
wall. Given that she'd travelled to the Middle East, I'd expected to find objects and
souvenirs from that part of the world.
But it was empty, and now there was this silence.
Her grey eyes were fixed on mine, but I held firm and didn't look away. Instinct
perhaps. A way of saying that I'm not frightened, but facing the challenge head-on.
Except that everything – the silence and the
white room, the noise of the traffic outside in the street – began to seem unreal.
How long were we going to stay there, saying nothing?
I started to track my own thoughts. Had I come there in search of material for my
play or did I really want knowledge, wisdom, power? I couldn't put my finger on
what it was that had led me to come and see…what? A witch?
My adolescent dreams surfaced. Who wouldn't like to meet a real witch, learn how
to perform magic, and gain the respect and fear of her friends? Who, as a young
woman, hasn't been outraged by the centuries of repression suffered by women
and felt that becoming a witch would be the best way of recovering her lost
identity? I'd been through that phase myself; I was independent and did what I
liked in the highly competitive world of the theatre, but then why was I never
content? Why was I always testing out my curiosity?
We must have been about the same age…or was I older? Did she, too, have a
boyfriend?
Athena moved closer. We were now less than an arm's length from each other and
I started to feel afraid. Was she a lesbian?
I didn't look away, but I made a mental note of where the door was so that I could
leave whenever I wished. No one had made me go to that house to meet someone
I'd never seen before in my life and sit there wasting time, not saying anything and
not learning anything either. What did she want?
That silence perhaps. My muscles began to grow tense. I was alone and helpless. I
desperately needed to talk or to make my mind stop telling me that I was under
threat. How could she possibly know who I was? We are what we say!
Had she asked me anything about my life? She'd wanted to know if I had a
boyfriend. I tried to say more about the theatre, but couldn't. And what about the
stories I'd heard about her gipsy ancestry, her stay in Transylvania, the land of
vampires?
My thoughts wouldn't stop: how much would that consultation cost? I was
terrified. I should have asked before. A fortune? And if I didn't pay, would she put
a spell on me that would eventually destroy me?
I felt an impulse to get to my feet, thank her and say that I hadn't come there just
to sit in silence. If you go to a psychiatrist, you have to talk. If you go to a church,
you listen to a sermon. If you go in search of magic, you find a teacher who wants
to explain the world to you and who gives you a series of rituals to follow. But
silence? Why did it make me feel so uncomfortable?
One question after another kept forming in my mind, and I couldn't stop thinking
or trying to find a reason for the two of us to be sitting there, saying nothing.
Suddenly, perhaps after five or ten long minutes of total immobility, she smiled.
I smiled too and relaxed.
'Try to be different. That's all.'
'That's all? Is sitting in silence being different? I imagine that, at this very moment,
there are thousands of people in London who are desperate for someone to talk
to, and all you can say to me is that silence makes a difference?'
'Now that you're talking and reorganising the universe, you'll end up convincing
yourself that you're right and I'm wrong. But as you experienced for yourself –
being silent is different.'
'It's unpleasant. It doesn't teach you anything.' She seemed indifferent to my
reaction.
'What theatre are you working at?'
Finally, she was taking an interest in my life! I was being restored to my human
condition, with a profession and everything! I invited her to come and see the play
we were putting on – it was the only way I could find to avenge myself, by showing
that I was capable of things that Athena was not. That silence had left a
humiliating aftertaste.
She asked if she could bring her son, and I said, no, it was for adults only.
'Well, I could always leave him with my mother. I haven't been to the theatre in
ages.'
She didn't charge for the consultation. When I met up with the other members of
the cast, I told them about my encounter with this mysterious creature. They were
all mad keen to meet someone who, when she first met you, asked only that you
sat in silence.
Athena arrived on the appointed day. She saw the play, came to my dressing-room
afterwards to say hello, but didn't say whether she'd enjoyed herself or not. My
colleagues suggested that I invite her to the
bar where we usually went after the performance. There, instead of keeping quiet,
she started answering a question that had been left unanswered at our first meeting.
'No one, not even the Mother would ever want sex to take place purely as a
celebration. Love must always be present. Didn't you say that you'd met people like
that? Well, be careful.'
My friends had no idea what she was talking about, but they warmed to the subject
and started bombarding her with questions. Something troubled me. Her answers
were very academic, as if she didn't have much experience of what she was talking
about. She spoke about the game of seduction, about fertility rites, and concluded
with a Greek myth, probably because I'd mentioned during our first meeting that
the theatre had begun in Greece. She must have spent the whole week reading up
on the subject.
'After millennia of male domination, we are returning to the cult of the Great
Mother. The Greeks called her Gaia, and according to the myth, she was born out
of Chaos, the void that existed before the universe. With her came Eros, the god
of love, and then she gave birth to the Sea and the Sky.'
'Who was the father?' asked one of my friends.
'No one. There's a technical term, parthenogenesis, which is a process of
reproduction that does not require fertilisation of the egg by a male. There's a
mystical term too, one to which we're more accustomed: Immaculate Conception.
'From Gaia sprang all the gods who would later people the Elysian Fields of
Greece, including our own dear Dionysus, your idol. But as man became
established as the principal political power in the cities, Gaia was forgotten, and
was replaced by Zeus, Ares, Apollo and company, all of whom were competent
enough, but didn't have the same allure as the Mother who originated everything.'
Then she questioned us about our work. The director asked if she'd like to give us
some lessons. 'On what?'
'On what you know.'
'To be perfectly honest, I learned all about the origins of theatre this week. I learn
everything as I need to learn it, that's what Edda told me to do.'
So I was right!
'But I can share other things that life has taught me.' They all agreed. And no one
asked who Edda was.
Deidre O'Neill, known as Edda
I said to Athena: 'You don't have to keep coming here all the time just to ask silly
questions. If a group has decided to take you on as a teacher, why not use that
opportunity to turn yourself into a teacher? 'Do what I always did.
'Try to feel good about yourself even when you feel like the least worthy of
creatures. Reject all those negative thoughts and let the Mother take possession of
your body and soul; surrender yourself to dance or to silence or to ordinary,
everyday activities – like taking your son to school, preparing supper, making sure
the house is tidy. Everything is worship if your mind is focused on the present
moment.
'Don't try to convince anyone of anything. When you don't know something, ask
or go away and find out. But when you do act, be like the silent, flowing river and
open yourself to a greater energy. Believe – that's what I said at our first meeting –
simply believe that you can.
'At first, you'll be confused and insecure. Then you'll start to believe that everyone
thinks they're being conned. It's not true. You have the knowledge, it's simply a
matter of being aware. All the minds on the planet are so easily cast down – they
fear illness, invasion, attack, death. Try to restore their lost joy to them.
'Be clear.
'Re-programme yourself every minute of each day with thoughts that make you
grow. When you're feeling irritated or confused, try to laugh at yourself. Laugh out
loud at this woman tormented by doubts and anxieties, convinced that her
problems are the most important thing in the world. Laugh at the sheer absurdity
of the situation, at the fact that despite being a manifestation of the Mother, you
still believe God is a man who lays down the rules. Most of our problems stem
from just that – from following rules. 'Concentrate.
'If you can find nothing on which to focus your mind, concentrate on your
breathing. The Mother's river of light is flowing in through your nose. Listen to
your heart beating, follow the thoughts you can't
control, control your desire to get up at once and to do something “useful”. Sit for
a few minutes each day, doing nothing, getting as much as you can out of that
time.
'When you're washing up, pray. Be thankful that there are plates to be washed; that
means there was food, that you fed someone, that you've lavished care on one or
more people, that you cooked and laid the table. Imagine the millions of people at
this moment who have absolutely nothing to wash up and no one for whom to lay
the table.
'There are women who say: “I'm not going to do the washing up, let the men do
it.” Fine, let the men do it if they want to, but that has nothing to do with equality.
There's nothing wrong with doing simple things, although if I were to publish an
article tomorrow saying everything I think, I'd be accused of working against the
feminist cause. Nonsense! As if washing up or wearing a bra or having someone
open or close a door could be humiliating to me as a woman. The fact is, I love it
when a man opens the door for me. According to etiquette this means: “She needs
me to do this because she's fragile”, but in my soul is written: “I'm being treated
like a goddess. I'm a queen.” I'm not here to work for the feminist cause, because
both men and women are a manifestation of the Mother, the Divine Unity. No
one can be greater than that.
'I'd love to see you giving classes on what you're learning. That's the main aim of
life – revelation! You make yourself into a channel; you listen to yourself and are
surprised at how capable you are. Remember your job at the bank? Perhaps you
never properly understood that what happened there was a result of the energy
flowing out your body, your eyes, your hands.
'You'll say it was the dance.
'The dance was simply a ritual. What is a ritual? It means transforming something
monotonous into something different, rhythmic, capable of channelling the Unity.
That's why I say again: be different even when you're washing up. Move your
hands so that they never repeat the same gesture twice, even though they maintain
the rhythm.
'If you find it helpful, try to visualise images – flowers, birds, trees in a forest. Don't
imagine single objects, like the candle you focused on when you came here for the
first time. Try to think of something collective. And do you know what you'll find?
That you didn't choose your thought.
'I'll give you an example: imagine a flock of birds flying. How many birds did you
see? Eleven, nineteen, five? You have a vague idea, but you don't know the exact
number. So where did that thought come from? Someone put it there. Someone
who knows the exact number of birds, trees, stones, flowers. Someone who, in
that fraction of a second, took charge of you and showed you Her power.
'You are what you believe yourself to be.
'Don't be like those people who believe in “positive thinking” and tell themselves
that they're loved and strong and capable. You don't need to do that, because you
know it already. And when you doubt it which happens, I think, quite often at this
stage of evolution – do as I suggested. Instead of trying to prove that you're better
than you think, just laugh. Laugh at your worries and insecurities. View your
anxieties with humour. It will be difficult at first, but you'll gradually get used to it.
'Now go back and meet all those people who think you know everything.
Convince yourself that they're right, because we all know everything: it's merely a
question of believing.
'Believe.
'As I said to you in Bucharest, the very first time we met, groups are very important
because they force us to progress. If you're alone, all you can do is laugh at
yourself, but if you're with others, you'll laugh and then immediately act. Groups
challenge us. Groups allow us to choose our affinities. Groups create a collective
energy, and ecstasy comes more easily because everyone infects everyone else.
'Groups can also destroy us of course, but that's part of life and the human
condition – living with other people. And anyone who's failed to develop an
instinct for survival has understood nothing of what the Mother is saying.
'You're lucky. A group has just asked you to teach them something, and that will
make you a
teacher.'
Heron Ryan, journalist
Before the first meeting with the actors, Athena came to my house. Ever since I
published the article on St Sarah, she'd been convinced that I understood her
world, which wasn't true at all. I simply wanted to attract her attention. I was trying
to come round to the idea that there might be an invisible reality capable of
interfering in our lives, but the only reason I did so was because of a love I didn't
want to believe I felt, but which was continuing to grow in a subtle, devastating
way.
I was content with my universe and didn't want to change it at all, even though I
was being propelled in that direction.
'I'm afraid,' she said as soon as she arrived. 'But I must go ahead and do what
they're asking of me. I need to believe.'
'You've had a lot of experiences in life. You learned from the gipsies, from the
dervishes in the desert, from–'
'Well, that's not quite true. Besides, what does learning mean: accumulating
knowledge or transforming your life?'
I suggested we go out that night for supper and to dance a little. She agreed to
supper, but rejected the dancing.
'Answer me,' she said, looking round my apartment. 'Is learning just putting things
on a shelf or is it discarding whatever is no longer useful and then continuing on
your way feeling lighter?'
On the shelves were all the books I'd invested so much money and time in buying,
reading and annotating. There were my personality, my education, my true
teachers.
'How many books have you got? Over a thousand, I'd say. But most of them you'll
probably never open again. You hang on to them because you don't believe.'
'I don't believe?'
'No, you don't believe, full stop. Anyone who believes, will go and read up about
theatre as I did when Andrea asked me about it, but, after that, it's a question of
letting the Mother speak through you and making discoveries as she speaks. And
as you make those discoveries, you'll manage to fill in the blank spaces that all
those writers left there on purpose to provoke the reader's imagination. And when
you fill in the spaces, you'll start to believe in your own abilities.
'How many people would love to read those books, but don't have the money to
buy them? Meanwhile, you sit here surrounded by all this stagnant energy, purely to
impress the friends who visit you. Or is it that you don't feel you've learned
anything from them and need to consult them again?'
I thought she was being rather hard on me, and that intrigued me. 'So you don't
think I need this library?'
'I think you need to read, but why hang on to all these books? Would it be asking
too much if we were to leave here right now, and before going to the restaurant,
distribute most of them to whoever we happened to pass in the street?'
'They wouldn't all fit in my car.' 'We could hire a truck.'
'But then we wouldn't get to the restaurant in time for supper. Besides, you came
here because you were feeling insecure, not in order to tell me what I should do
with my books. Without them I'd feel naked.' 'Ignorant, you mean.'
'Uncultivated would be the right word.'
'So your culture isn't in your heart, it's on your bookshelves.'
Enough was enough. I picked up the phone to reserve a table and told the
restaurant that we'd be there in fifteen minutes. Athena was trying to avoid the
problem that had brought her here. Her deep insecurity was making her go on the
attack, rather than looking at herself. She needed a man by her side and, who
knows, was perhaps sounding me out to see how far I'd go, using her feminine
wiles to discover just what I'd be prepared to do for her.
Simply being in her presence seemed to justify my very existence. Was that what
she wanted to hear? Fine, I'd tell her over supper. I'd be capable of doing almost
anything, even leaving the woman I was living with, but I drew the line, of course,
at giving away my books.
In the taxi, we returned to the subject of the theatre group, although I was, at that
moment, prepared to discuss something I never normally spoke about – love, a
subject I found far more complicated than Marx, Jung, the British Labour Party or
the day-to-day problems at a newspaper office.
'You don't need to worry,' I said, feeling a desire to hold her hand. 'It'll be all right.
Talk about calligraphy. Talk about dancing. Talk about the things you know.'
'If I did that, I'd never discover what it is I don't know. When I'm there, I'll have to
allow my mind to go still and let my heart begin to speak. But it's the first time I've
done that, and I'm frightened.'
'Would you like me to come with you?'
She accepted at once. We arrived at the restaurant, ordered some wine and started
to drink. I was drinking in order to get up the courage to say what I thought I was
feeling, although it seemed absurd to me to be declaring my love to someone I
hardly knew. And she was drinking because she was afraid of talking about what
she didn't know.
After the second glass of wine, I realised how on edge she was. I tried to hold her
hand, but she gently pulled away.
'I can't be afraid.'
'Of course you can, Athena. I often feel afraid, and yet, when I need to, I go ahead
and face up to whatever it is I'm afraid of.'
I was on edge too. I refilled our glasses. The waiter kept coming over to ask what
we'd like to eat, and I kept telling him that we'd order later.
I was talking about whatever came into my head. Athena was listening politely, but
she seemed far away, in some dark universe full of ghosts. At one point, she told
me again about the woman in Scotland and what she'd said. I asked if it made
sense to teach what you didn't know.
'Did anyone ever teach you how to love?' she replied. Could she be reading my
thoughts?
'And yet,' she went on, 'you're as capable of love as any other human being. How
did you learn? You didn't, you simply believe. You believe, therefore you love.'
'Athena…'
I hesitated, then managed to finish my sentence, although not at all as I had
intended. '…perhaps we should order some food.'
I realised that I wasn't yet prepared to mention the things that were troubling my
world. I called the waiter over and ordered some starters, then some more starters,
a main dish, a pudding and another bottle of wine. The more time I had, the
better.
'You're acting strangely. Was it my comment about your books? You do what you
like. It's not my job to change your world. I was obviously sticking my nose in
where it wasn't wanted.'
I had been thinking about that business of 'changing the world' only a few seconds
before. 'Athena, you're always telling me about…no, I need to talk about
something that happened in that bar in Sibiu, with the gipsy music.'
'In the restaurant, you mean?'
'Yes, in the restaurant. Today we were discussing books, the things that we
accumulate and that take up space. Perhaps you're right. There's something I've
been wanting to do ever since I saw you dancing that night. It weighs more and
more heavily on my heart.'
'I don't know what you mean.'
'Of course you do. I'm talking about the love I'm discovering now and doing my
best to destroy before it reveals itself. I'd like you to accept it. It's the little I have
of myself, but it's not my own. It's not exclusively yours, because there's someone
else in my life, but I would be happy if you could accept it anyway. An Arab poet
from your country, Khalil Gibran, says: “It is well to give when asked, but it is
better to give unasked.” If I don't say everything I need to say tonight, I'll merely
be a spectator watching events unfold rather than the person actually experiencing
them.'
I took a deep breath. The wine had helped me to free myself.
She drained her glass, and I did the same. The waiter appeared with the food,
making a few comments about the various dishes, explaining the ingredients and
the way in which they had been cooked. Athena and I kept our eyes fixed on each
other. Andrea had told me that this is what Athena had done when they met for
the first time, and she was convinced it was simply a way of intimidating others.
The silence was terrifying. I imagined her getting up from the table and citing her
famous, invisible boyfriend from Scotland Yard, or saying that she was very
flattered, but she had to think about the class she was to give the next day.
'And is there anything you would withhold? Some day, all that you have shall be
given. The trees give that they may live, for to withhold is to perish.'
She was speaking quietly and carefully because of the wine she'd drunk, but her
voice nevertheless silenced everything around us.
'And what greater merit shall there be than that which lies in the courage and the
confidence, nay the charity, of receiving? You give but little when you give ofyour
possessions. It is when you give of yourself that you truly give.'
She said all this without smiling. I felt as if I were conversing with a sphinx.
'Words written by the same poet you were quoting. I learned them at school, but I
don't need the book where he wrote those words. I've kept his words in my heart.'
She drank a little more wine. I did the same. I couldn't bring myself to ask if she
accepted my love or not, but I felt lighter.
'You may be right. I'll donate my books to a public library and only keep those I
really will re-read
one day.'
'Is that what you want to talk about now?'
'No. I just don't know how to continue the conversation.'
'Shall we eat then and enjoy the food. Does that seem a good idea?'
No, it didn't seem like a good idea. I wanted to hear something different, but I was
afraid to ask, and so I babbled on about libraries, books and poets, regretting
having ordered so many dishes. I was the one who wanted to escape now, because
I didn't know how to continue.
In the end, she made me promise that I would be at the theatre for her first class,
and, for me, that was a signal. She needed me; she had accepted what I had
unconsciously dreamed of offering her ever since I saw her dancing in a restaurant
in Transylvania, but which I had only been capable of understanding that night.
Or, as Athena would have said, of believing.
Andrea McCain, actress
Of course I'm to blame. If it hadn't been for me, Athena would never have come
to the theatre that morning, gathered us all together, asked us to lie down on the
stage and begin a relaxation exercise involving breathing and bringing our
awareness to each part of the body.
'Relax your thighs…'
We all obeyed, as if we were before a goddess, someone who knew more than all
of us, even though we'd done this kind of exercise hundreds of times before. We
were all curious to know what would come after '…now relax your face and
breathe deeply'.
Did she really think she was teaching us anything new? We were expecting a
lecture, a talk! But I must control myself. Let's get back to what happened then.
We relaxed and then came a silence which left us completely disoriented. When I
discussed it with my colleagues afterwards, we all agreed that we felt the exercise
was over, that it was time to sit up and look around, except that no one did. We
remained lying down, in a kind of enforced meditation, for fifteen interminable
minutes.
Then she spoke again.
'You've had plenty of time to doubt me now. One or two of you looked impatient.
But now I'm going to ask you just one thing: when I count to three, be different. I
don't mean be another person, an animal or a house. Try to forget everything
you've learned on drama courses. I'm not asking you to be actors and to
demonstrate your abilities. I'm asking you to cease being human and to transform
yourselves into something you don't know.'
We were all still lying on the floor with our eyes closed and so couldn't see how
anyone else was reacting. Athena was playing on that uncertainty.
'I'm going to say a few words and you'll immediately associate certain images with
those words. Remember that you're all full of the poison of preconceived ideas
and that if I were to say “fate”, you would probably start imagining your lives in
the future. If I were to say “red”, you would probably make some psychoanalytic
interpretation. That isn't what I want. As I said, I want you to be different.'
She couldn't explain what she really wanted. When no one complained, I felt sure
they were simply being polite, but that when the 'lecture' was over, they would
never invite Athena back. They would even tell me that I'd been naïve to have
sought her out in the first place.
'The first word is “sacred”.'
So as not to die of boredom, I decided to join in the game. I imagined my mother,
my boyfriend, my future children, a brilliant career.
'Make a gesture that means “sacred”.'
I folded my arms over my chest, as if I were embracing all my loved ones. I found
out later that most people opened their arms to form a cross, and that one of the
women opened her legs, as if she were making love.
'Relax again, and again forget about everything and keep your eyes closed. I'm not
criticising, but from what I saw, you seem to be giving form to what you consider
to be sacred. That isn't what I want. When I give you the next word, don't try to
define it as it manifests itself in the world. Open all the channels and allow the
poison of reality to drain away. Be abstract and then you will enter the world I'm
guiding you towards.'
That last phrase had real authority, and I felt the energy in the theatre change.
Now the voice knew where it wanted to take us. She was a teacher now, not a
lecturer.
'Earth,' she said.
Suddenly I understood what she meant. It was no longer my imagination that
mattered, but my body in contact with the soil. I was the Earth.
'Make a gesture that represents Earth.'
I didn't move. I was the soil of that stage.
'Perfect,' she said. 'None of you moved. For the first time you all experienced the
same feeling. Instead of describing something, you transformed yourself into an
idea.'
She fell silent again for what I imagined were five long minutes. The silence made
us feel lost, unable to tell whether she simply had no idea how to continue, or if
she was merely unfamiliar with our usual intense rhythm of working.
'I'm going to say a third word.' She paused.
'Centre.'
I felt – and this was entirely unconscious – that all my vital energy went to my
navel, where it glowed yellow. This frightened me. If someone touched it, I could
die.
'Make a gesture for centre!'
Her words sounded like a command. I immediately placed my hands on my belly
to protect myself. 'Perfect,' said Athena. 'You can sit up now.'
I opened my eyes and saw the extinguished stage lights up above me, distant and
dull. I rubbed my face and got to my feet. I noticed that my colleagues looked
surprised.
'Was that the lecture?' asked the director. 'You can call it a lecture if you like.'
'Well, thank you for coming. Now, if you'll excuse us, we have to start rehearsals
for the next play.' 'But I haven't finished yet.'
'Perhaps another time.'
Everyone seemed confused by the director's reaction. After some initial doubts, I
think we were enjoying the session – it was different, no pretending to be things or
people, no visualising apples or candles. No sitting in a circle holding hands as if
we were practising some sacred ritual. It was simply something slightly absurd and
we wanted to know where it would take us.
Without a flicker of emotion, Athena bent down to pick up her bag. At that
moment, we heard a voice from the stalls.
'Marvellous!'
Heron had come to join her. The director was afraid of him because Heron knew
the theatre critics on his newspaper and had close ties with the media generally.
'You stopped being individuals and turned into ideas. What a shame you're so
busy, but don't worry, Athena, we'll find another group to work with and then I
can see how your “lecture” ends. I have contacts.'
I was still thinking about the light travelling through my whole body to my navel.
Who was that woman? Had my colleagues experienced the same thing?
'Just a moment,' said the director, aware of the look of surprise on everyone's face.
'I suppose we could postpone rehearsals today…'
'No, you mustn't do that, besides I have to get back to the newspaper and write
something about this woman. You carry on doing what you always do. I've just
found an excellent story.'
If Athena felt lost in that debate between the two men, she didn't show it. She
climbed down from the stage and went off with Heron. We turned to the director
and asked him why he'd reacted like that.
'With all due respect, Andrea, I thought the conversation in the bar about sex was
far more interesting than the nonsense we've just been engaging in. Did you notice
how she kept falling silent? She didn't know what to do next!'
'But I felt something strange,' said one of the older actors. 'When she said “centre”,
it was as if all my vital energy were suddenly focused in my navel. I've never
experienced that before.'
'Did you? Are you sure?' asked an actress, and judging by her words, she'd
experienced the same
thing.
'She's a bit of a witch, that woman,' said the director, interrupting the conversation.
'Let's get back to work.'
We started doing our usual stretching exercises, warm-ups and meditation, all
strictly by the book. Then after a few improvisations, we went straight into a
read-through of the new script. Gradually, Athena's presence seemed to be
dissolving, and everything was returning to what it was – a theatre, a ritual created
by the Greeks thousands of years ago, where we were used to pretending to be
different people.
But that was pure play-acting. Athena wasn't like that, and I was determined to see
her again, especially after what the director had said about her.
Heron Ryan, journalist
Unbeknown to Athena, I'd followed exactly the same steps as the actors, obeying
everything she told us to do, except that I kept my eyes open so that I could
follow what was happening on stage. The moment she said 'Make a gesture for
centre', I'd placed my hand on my navel, and, to my surprise, I saw that everyone,
including the director, had done the same. What was going on?
That afternoon, I had to write a dreary article about a visiting head of state – a real
drag. In order to amuse myself between phone calls, I decided to ask colleagues in
the office what gesture they would make if I said the word 'centre'. Most of them
made jokey comments about political parties. One pointed to the centre of the
Earth. Another put his hand on his heart. But no one, absolutely no one, thought
of their navel as the centre of anything. In the end, though, I managed to speak to
someone who had some interesting information on the subject.
When I got home, Andrea had had a bath, laid the table and was waiting for me to
start supper. She opened a bottle of very expensive wine, filled two glasses and
offered me one.
'So how was supper last night?'
How long can a man live with a lie? I didn't want to lose the woman standing there
before me, who had stuck with me through thick and thin, who was always by my
side when I felt my life had lost meaning and direction. I loved her, but in the
crazy world into which I was blindly plunging, my heart was far away, trying to
adapt to something it possibly knew, but couldn't accept: being large enough for
two people.
Since I would never risk letting go of a certainty in favour of a mere possibility, I
tried to minimise the significance of what had happened at the restaurant, mainly
because nothing had happened, apart from an exchange of lines by a poet who
had suffered greatly for love.
'Athena's a difficult person to get to know.' Andrea laughed.
'That's precisely why men must find her so fascinating. She awakens that rapidly
disappearing protective instinct of yours.'
Best to change the subject. I've always been convinced that women have a
supernatural ability to know what's going on in a man's soul. They're all witches.
'I've been looking into what happened at the theatre today. You don't know this,
but I had my eyes open throughout the exercises.'
'You've always got your eyes open. I assume it's part of being a journalist. And
you're going to talk about the moment when we all did exactly the same thing. We
talked a lot about that in the bar after rehearsals.'
'A historian told me about a Greek temple where they used to predict the future
(Editor's note: the temple ofApollo at Delphi) and which housed a marble stone
called “the navel”. Stories from the time describe Delphi as the centre of the
planet. I went to the newspaper archives to make a few enquiries: in Petra, in
Jordan, there's another “conic navel”, symbolising not just the centre of the planet,
but of the entire universe. Both “navels” try to show the axis through which the
energy of the world travels, marking in a visible way something that is only there
on the “invisible” map. Jerusalem is also called the navel of the
world, as is an island in the Pacific Ocean, and another place I've forgotten now,
because I had never associated the two things.'
'Like dance!' 'What?' 'Nothing.'
'No, I know what you mean – belly dancing, the oldest form of dance recorded, in
which everything revolves about the belly. I was trying to avoid the subject
because I told you that in Transylvania I saw Athena dance. She was dressed, of
course, but…'
'…all the movement began with her navel, and gradually spread to the rest of the
body.' She was right.
Best to change the subject again and talk about the theatre, about boring
journalistic stuff, then drink a little wine and end up in bed making love while,
outside, the rain was starting to fall. I noticed that, at the moment of orgasm,
Andrea's body was all focused on her belly. I'd seen this many times before, but
never thought anything of it.
Antoine Locadour, historian[/h1
Heron started spending a fortune on phone calls to France, asking me to get all
the information I could by the weekend, and he kept going on about the navel,
which seemed to me the least interesting and least romantic thing in the world. But,
then, the English don't see things in the same way as the French, and so, instead
of asking questions, I tried to find out what science had to say on the subject.
I soon realised that historical knowledge wasn't enough. I could locate a
monument here, a dolmen there, but the odd thing was that the ancient cultures all
seemed to agree on the subject and even use the same word to define the places
they considered sacred. I'd never noticed this before and I started to get interested.
When I saw the number of coincidences, I went in search of something that would
complement them – human behaviour and beliefs.
I immediately had to reject the first and most logical explanation, that we're
nourished through the umbilical cord, which is why the navel is, for us, the centre
of life. A psychologist immediately pointed out that the theory made no sense at
all: man's central idea is always to 'cut' the umbilical cord and, from then on, the
brain or the heart become the more important symbols.
When we're interested in something, everything around us appears to refer to it
(the mystics call these phenomena 'signs', the sceptics 'coincidence', and
psychologists 'concentrated focus', although I've yet to find out what term
historians should use). One night, my adolescent daughter came home with a navel
piercing.
'Why did you do that?' 'Because I felt like it.'
A perfectly natural and honest explanation, even for a historian who needs to find
a reason for everything. When I went into her room, I saw a poster of her
favourite female pop star. She had a bare midriff and, in that photo on the wall,
her navel did look like the centre of the world.
I phoned Heron and asked why he was so interested. For the first time, he told me
about what had happened at the theatre and how the people there had all
responded to a command in the same spontaneous, unexpected manner. It was
impossible to get any more information out of my daughter, and so I decided to
consult some specialists.
No one seemed very interested, until I found François Shepka, an Indian
psychologist (Editor's note: the scientist requested that his name and nationality be
changed), who was starting to revolutionise the therapies currently in use.
According to him, the idea that traumas could be resolved by a return to childhood
had never got anyone anywhere. Many problems that had been overcome in adult
life resurfaced, and grown-ups started blaming their parents for failures and defeats.
Shepka was at war with the various French psychoanalytic associations, and a
conversation about absurd subjects, like the navel, seemed to relax him.
He warmed to the theme, but didn't, at first, tackle it directly. He said that according
to one of the most respected psychoanalysts in history, the Swiss analyst Carl
Gustav Jung, we all drank from the same spring. It's called the 'soul of the world'.
However much we try to be independent individuals, a part of our memory is the
same. We all seek the ideal of beauty, dance, divinity and music.
Society, meanwhile, tries to define how these ideals should be manifested in reality.
Currently, for example, the ideal of beauty is to be thin, and yet thousands of years
ago all the images of goddesses were
fat. It's the same with happiness: there are a series of rules, and if you fail to follow
them, your conscious mind will refuse to accept the idea that you're happy.
Jung used to divide individual progress into four stages: the first was the Persona –
the mask we use every day, pretending to be who we are. We believe that the world
depends on us, that we're wonderful parents and that our children don't
understand us, that our bosses are unfair, that the dream of every human being is
never to work and to travel constantly. Many people realise that there's something
wrong with this story, but because they don't want to change anything, they quickly
drive the thought from their head. A few do try to understand what is wrong and
end up finding the Shadow.
The Shadow is our dark side, which dictates how we should act and behave. When
we try to free ourselves from the Persona, we turn on a light inside us and we see
the cobwebs, the cowardice, the meanness. The Shadow is there to stop our
progress, and it usually succeeds, and we run back to what we were before we
doubted. However, some do survive this encounter with their own cobwebs,
saying: 'Yes, I have a few faults, but I'm good enough, and I want to go forward.'
At this moment, the Shadow disappears and we come into contact with the Soul.
By Soul, Jung didn't mean 'soul' in the religious sense; he speaks of a return to the
Soul of the World, the source of all knowledge. Instincts become sharper,
emotions more radical, the interpretation of signs becomes more important than
logic, perceptions of reality grow less rigid. We start to struggle with things to which
we are unaccustomed and we start to react in ways that we ourselves find
unexpected.
And we discover that if we can channel that continuous flow of energy, we can
organise it around a very solid centre, what Jung calls the Wise Old Man for men
and the Great Mother for women.
Allowing this to manifest itself is dangerous. Generally speaking, anyone who
reaches this stage has a tendency to consider themselves a saint, a tamer of spirits,
a prophet. A great deal of maturity is required if someone is to come into contact
with the energy of the Wise Old Man or the Great Mother.
'Jung went mad,' said my friend, when he had explained the four stages described
by the Swiss psychoanalyst. 'When he got in touch with his Wise Old Man, he
started saying that he was guided by a spirit called Philemon.'
'And finally…'
'…we come to the symbol of the navel. Not only people, but societies, too, fit
these four stages. Western civilisation has a Persona, the ideas that guide us. In its
attempt to adapt to changes, it comes into contact with the Shadow, and we see
mass demonstrations, in which the collective energy can be manipulated both for
good and ill. Suddenly, for some reason, the Persona or the Shadow are no longer
enough for human beings, and then comes the moment to make the leap, the
unconscious connection with the Soul. New values begin to emerge.'
'I've noticed that. I've noticed a resurgence in the cult of the female face of God.'
'An excellent example. And at the end of this process, if those new values are to
become established, the entire race comes into contact with the symbols, the
coded language by which present-day generations communicate with their ancestral
knowledge. One of those symbols of rebirth is the navel. In the navel of Vishnu,
the Indian divinity responsible for creation and destruction, sits the god who will
rule each cycle. Yogis consider the navel one of the chakras, one of the sacred
points on the human body. Primitive tribes often used to build monuments in the
place they believed to be the navel of the world. In South America, people who go
into trances say that the true form of the human being is a luminous egg, which
connects with other people through filaments that emerge from the navel. The
mandala, a design said to stimulate meditation, is a symbolic representation of this.'
I passed all this information on to Heron in England before the agreed date. I told
him that the woman who had succeeded in provoking the same absurd reaction in
a group of people must have enormous power, and that I wouldn't be surprised if
she wasn't some kind of paranormal. I suggested that he study her more closely.
I had never thought about the subject before, and I tried to forget it at once.
However, my daughter said that I was behaving oddly, thinking only of myself, that
I was, in short, navel-gazing!
Deidre O'Neill, known as Edda
'It was a complete disaster. How could you have put the idea in my head that I
could teach? Why humiliate me in front of other people? I should just forget you
even exist. When I was taught to dance, I danced. When I was taught calligraphy, I
practised calligraphy. But demanding that I go so far beyond my
limits was pure wickedness. That's why I caught the train up to Scotland, that's why
I came here, so that you could see how much I hate you!'
She couldn't stop crying. Fortunately, she'd left the child with her parents, because
she was talking rather too loudly and there was a faint whiff of wine on her breath.
I asked her to come in. Making all that noise at my front door would do nothing to
help my already somewhat tarnished reputation, with people putting it around that
I received visits from both men and women and organised sex orgies in the name
of Satan.
But she still stood there, shouting:
'It's all your fault! You humiliated me!'
One window opened, and then another. Well, anyone working to change the axis
of the world must be prepared for the fact that her neighbours won't always be
happy. I went over to Athena and did exactly what she wanted me to do: I put my
arms around her.
She continued weeping, her head resting on my shoulder. Very gently I helped her
up the steps and into the house. I made some tea, the recipe for which I share
with no one because it was taught to me by my protector. I placed it in front of
her and she drank it down in one. By doing so, she demonstrated that her trust in
me was still intact.
'Why am I like this?' she asked.
I knew then that the effects of the alcohol had been neutralised.
'There are men who love me. I have a son who adores me and sees me as his
model in life. I have adoptive parents whom I consider to be my real family and
who would lay down their lives for me. I filled in all the blank spaces in my past
when I went in search of my birth mother. I have enough money to spend the
next three years doing nothing but enjoy life, and still I'm not content!
'I feel miserable and guilty because God blessed me with tragedies that I've
managed to overcome and with miracles to which I've done credit, but I'm never
content. I always want more. The last thing I needed was to go to that theatre and
add a failure to my list of victories!'
'Do you think you did the wrong thing?' She looked at me in surprise:
'Why do you ask that?'
I said nothing, but awaited her answer.
'No, I did the right thing. I went there with a journalist friend, and I didn't have a
clue what I was going to do, but suddenly things started to emerge as if out of the
void. I felt the presence of the Great Mother by my side, guiding me, instructing
me, filling my voice with a confidence I didn't really feel.' 'So why are you
complaining?'
'Because no one understood!'
'Is that important? Important enough to make you travel up to Scotland and insult
me in front of everyone?'
'Of course it's important! If I can do absolutely anything and know I'm doing the
right thing, how come I'm not at least loved and admired?'
So that was the problem. I took her hand and led her into the same room where,
weeks before, she had sat contemplating a candle. I asked her to sit down and try
to calm herself a little, although I was sure the tea was already taking effect. I went
to my room, picked up a round mirror and placed it before her.
'You have everything and you've fought for every inch of your territory. Now look
at your tears. Look at your face and the bitterness etched on it. Look at the
woman in the mirror, but don't laugh this time, try to understand her.'
I allowed her time to follow my instructions. When I saw that she was, as I
intended, going into a trance, I went on:
'What is the secret of life? We call it “grace” or “blessing”. Everyone struggles to be
satisfied with what they have. Apart from me. Apart from you. Apart from a few
people who will, alas, have to make a small sacrifice in the name of something
greater.
'Our imagination is larger than the world around us; we go beyond our limits. This
used to be called “witchcraft”, but fortunately things have changed, otherwise we
would both already have been burned at the stake. When they stopped burning
women, science found an explanation for our behaviour, normally referred to as
“female hysteria”. We don't get burned any more, but it does cause problems,
especially in the
workplace. But don't worry; eventually they'll call it “wisdom”. Keep looking into
the mirror. Who can you see?'
'A woman.'
'And what is there beyond that woman?' She hesitated. I asked again and she said:
'Another woman, more authentic and more intelligent than me. It's as if she were a
soul that didn't belong to me, but which is nonetheless part of me.'
'Exactly. Now I'm going to ask you to imagine one of the most important symbols
in alchemy: a snake forming a circle and swallowing its own tail. Can you imagine
that?'
She nodded.
'That's what life is like for people like you and me. We're constantly destroying and
rebuilding ourselves. Everything in your life has followed the same pattern: from
lost to found; from divorce to new love; from working in a bank to selling real
estate in the desert. Only one thing remains intact – your son. He is the connecting
thread, and you must respect that.'
She started to cry again, but her tears were different this time.
'You came here because you saw a female face in the flames. That face is the face
you can see now in the mirror, so try to do honour to it. Don't let yourself be
weighed down by what other people think, because in a few years, in a few
decades, or in a few centuries, that way of thinking will be changed. Live now what
others will only live in the future.
'What do you want? You can't want to be happy, because that's too easy and too
boring. You can't want only to love, because that's impossible. What do you want?
You want to justify your life, to live it as intensely as possible. That is at once a
trap and a source of ecstasy. Try to be alert to that danger, and experience the joy
and the adventure of being that woman who is beyond the image reflected in the
mirror.' Her eyes closed, but I knew that my words had penetrated her soul and
would stay there.
'If you want to take a risk and continue teaching, do so. If you don't want to, know
that you've already gone further than most other people.'
Her body began to relax. I held her in my arms until she fell asleep, her head on
my breast.
I tried to whisper a few more things to her, because I'd been through the same
stages, and I knew how difficult it was – just as my protector had told me it would
be and as I myself had found out through painful experience. However, the fact
that it was difficult didn't make the experience any less interesting.
What experience? Living as a human being and as a divinity. Moving from tension
into relaxation. From relaxation into trance. From trance into a more intense
contact with other people. From that contact back into tension and so on, like the
serpent swallowing its own tail.
It was no easy matter, mainly because it requires unconditional love, which does
not fear suffering, rejection, loss.
Whoever drinks this water once can never quench her thirst at other springs.
Andrea McCain, actress
'The other day you mentioned Gaia, who created herself and had a child without
the help of a man. You said, quite rightly, that the Great Mother was eventually
superseded by the male gods. But you forgot about Hera, a descendant of your
favourite goddess. Hera is more important because she's more practical. She rules
the skies and the Earth, the seasons of the year and storms. According to the same
Greeks you cited, the Milky Way that we see in the sky was created out of the milk
that spurted forth from her breast. A beautiful breast, it must be said, because
all-powerful Zeus changed himself into a bird purely in order to be able to have his
way with her without being rejected.'
We were walking through a large department store in Knightsbridge. I'd phoned
her, saying that I'd like to talk, and she'd invited me to the winter sales. It would
have been far more pleasant to have a cup of tea together or lunch in some quiet
restaurant.
'Your son could get lost in this crowd.'
'Don't worry about him. Go on with what you were telling me.'
'Hera discovered the trick and forced Zeus to marry her. Immediately after the
ceremony, however, the great king of Olympus returned to his playboy lifestyle,
seducing any woman, mortal or immortal, who happened by. Hera, however,
remained faithful. Rather than blame her husband, she blamed the women for their
loose behaviour.'
'Isn't that what we all do?'
I didn't know what she meant and so I carried on talking as if I hadn't heard what
she'd said.
'Then she decided to give him a taste of his own medicine and find a god or a man
to take to her bed. Look, couldn't we stop for a while and have a coffee?'
But Athena had just gone into a lingerie shop.
'Do you think this is pretty?' she asked, holding up a provocative flesh-coloured
bra and pantie set. 'Yes, very. Will anyone see it if you wear it?'
'Of course, or do you think I'm a saint? But go on with what you were saying
about Hera.'
'Zeus was horrified by her behaviour, but Hera was leading an independent life and
didn't give two hoots about her marriage. Have you really got a boyfriend?'
'Yes.'
'I've never seen him.'
She went over to the cash desk, paid for the lingerie and put it in her bag.
'Viorel's hungry, and I'm sure he's not the slightest bit interested in Greek myths, so
hurry up and finish Hera's story.'
'It has a rather silly ending. Zeus, afraid of losing his beloved, pretended that he
was getting married again. When Hera found out, she saw that things had gone too
far. Lovers were one thing, but divorce was unthinkable.'
'Nothing new there, then.'
'She decided to go to the ceremony and kick up a fuss, and it was only then that
she realised Zeus was marrying a statue.'
'What did Hera do?'
'She roared with laughter. That broke the ice between them, and she became once
more the queen of the skies.'
'Great. So if that ever happens to you…' 'What?'
'If your man gets himself another woman, don't forget to laugh.'
'I'm not a goddess. I'd be much more vengeful. Anyway, why is it I've never seen
your boyfriend?' 'Because he's always busy.'
'Where did you meet him?'
'At the bank where I used to work. He had an account there. And now, if you
don't mind, my son's waiting for me. You're right, if I don't keep my eye on him,
he could get lost amongst all these people. By the way, we're having a meeting at
my place next week. You're invited, of course.'
'Yes, and I know who organised it.'
Athena kissed me lightly on both cheeks and left. At least, she'd got the message.
That afternoon, at the theatre, the director made a point of telling me that he was
annoyed because, he said, I'd arranged for a group of actors to go and visit 'that
woman'. I explained that it hadn't been my idea. Heron had become obsessed with
the subject of navels and had asked me if some of the other actors would be
prepared to continue the interrupted 'lecture'.
'That said,' I added, 'it was my choice to ask them.'
Of course it was, but the last thing I wanted was for him to go to Athena's house
alone.
The actors had all arrived, but, instead of another read-through of the new play,
the director decided to change the programme.
'Today we'll do another exercise in psychodrama.' (Editor's note: a therapeutic
technique, which involves people acting out their personal experiences.)
There was no need. We all knew how the characters would behave in the
situations described by the playwright.
'Can I suggest a subject?'
Everyone turned to look at me. The director seemed surprised. 'What's this, a
revolt?'
'No, listen. We create a situation where a man, after great difficulty, manages to get
a group of people together to celebrate an important ritual in the community,
something, let's say, like the autumn harvest. Meanwhile, a strange woman arrives,
and because of her beauty and the various rumours circulating
– about her being a goddess in disguise, for example – the group the man has
formed in order to keep alive the traditions in his village breaks up, and its
members all go off to see the woman instead.'
'But that's got nothing to do with the play we're rehearsing!' said one of the
actresses. The director, however, had understood what I was driving at.
'That's an excellent idea. Let's begin.' And turning to me, he said:
'Andrea, you can be the new arrival. That way you can get a better understanding
of the situation in the village. And I'll be the decent man trying to preserve the old
ways. The group will be made up of couples who go to church, get together on
Saturdays to do work in the community, and generally help each other.'
We lay down on the floor, did some relaxation, and then began the exercise
proper, which was really very simple. The main character (in this case, me) created
various situations and the others reacted to them.
When the relaxation was over, I transformed myself into Athena. In my fantasy,
she roamed the world like Satan in search of subjects for her realm, but she
disguised herself as Gaia, the goddess who knows everything and created
everything. For fifteen minutes, the other actors paired up into 'couples', got to
know each other and invented a common history involving children, farms,
understanding and friendship. When I felt this little universe was ready, I sat at one
corner of the stage and began to speak about love.
'Here we are in this little village, and you think I'm a stranger, which is why you're
interested in what I have to tell you. You've never travelled and don't know what
goes on beyond the mountains, but I can tell you: there's no need to praise the
Earth. The Earth will always be generous with this community. The important
thing is to praise human beings. You say you'd love to travel, but you misuse the
word “love”. Love is a relationship between people.
'Your one desire is for the harvest to be a good one and that's why you've decided
to love the Earth. More nonsense: love isn't desire or knowledge or admiration. It's
a challenge; it's an invisible fire. That's why, if you think I'm a stranger on this
Earth, you're wrong. Everything is familiar to me because I come in strength and in
fire, and when I leave, no one will be the same. I bring true love, not the love they
write about in books or in fairytales.'
The 'husband' of one of the 'couples' began looking at me. His 'wife' became
distraught.
During the rest of the exercise, the director – or, rather, the decent man – did all he
could to explain the importance of maintaining traditions, praising the Earth and
asking the Earth to be as generous this year as it had been last year. I spoke only
of love.
'He says the Earth needs rituals, well, I can guarantee that if there's love enough
amongst you, you'll have an abundant harvest, because love is the feeling that
transforms everything. But what do I see? Friendship. Passion died out a long time
ago, because you've all got used to each other. That's why the Earth gives only
what it gave last year, neither more nor less. And that's why, in the darkness of
your souls, you silently complain that nothing in your lives changes. Why? Because
you've always tried to control the force that transforms everything so that your
lives can carry on without being faced by any major challenges.'
The decent man explained:
'Our community has survived because we've always respected the laws by which
even love itself is guided. Anyone who falls in love without taking into account the
common good, will be condemned to live in constant fear of hurting his partner,
of irritating his new love, of losing everything he built. A stranger with no ties and
no history can say what she likes, but she doesn't know how hard it was to get
where we are now. She doesn't know the sacrifices we made for our children. She
doesn't know that we work tirelessly so that the Earth will be generous with us, so
that we will be at peace, and so that we can store away provisions for the future.'
For an hour, I defended the passion that devours everything, while the decent man
spoke of the feeling that brings peace and tranquillity. In the end, I was left talking
to myself, while the whole community gathered around him.
I'd played my role with great gusto and with a conviction I didn't even know I felt.
Despite everything, though, the stranger left the village without having convinced
anyone.
And that made me very, very happy.
Heron Ryan, journalist
An old friend of mine always says: 'People learn twenty-five per cent from their
teacher, twentyfive per cent from listening to themselves, twenty-five per cent from
their friends and twenty-five per cent from time.' At that first meeting at Athena's
apartment, where she was trying to conclude the class she had started at the
theatre, we all learned from…well, I'm not quite sure from what.
She was waiting for us, with her son, in her small living room. I noticed that the
room was entirely painted in white and was completely empty apart from one item
of furniture with a sound system on it, and a pile of CDs. I thought it odd that her
son should be there, because he was sure to be bored by the class. I was assuming
she would simply pick up from where we had stopped, giving us commands
through single words. But she had other plans. She explained that she was going to
play some music from Siberia and that we should all just listen.
Nothing more.
'I don't get anywhere meditating,' she said. 'I see people sitting there with their eyes
closed, a smile on their lips or else grave-faced and arrogant, concentrating on
absolutely nothing, convinced that they're in touch with God or with the Goddess.
So instead, let's listen to some music together.'
Again that feeling of unease, as if Athena didn't know exactly what she was doing.
But nearly all the actors from the theatre were there, including the director, who,
according to Andrea, had come to spy on the enemy camp.
The music stopped.
'This time I want you to dance to a rhythm that has nothing whatever to do with
the melody.' Athena put the music on again, with the volume right up, and started
to dance, making no attempt to move gracefully. Only an older man, who took the
role of the drunken king in the latest play, did as he was told. No one else moved.
They all seemed slightly constrained. One woman looked at her watch – only ten
minutes had passed.
Athena stopped and looked round. 'Why are you just standing there?'
'Well,' said one of the actresses timidly, 'it seems a bit ridiculous to be doing that.
We've been trained in harmony, not its opposite.'
'Just do as I say. Do you need an explanation? Right, I'll give you one. Changes
only happen when we go totally against everything we're used to doing.'
Turning to the 'drunken king', she said:
'Why did you agree to dance against the rhythm of the music?' 'Oh, I've never had
any sense of rhythm anyway.'
Everyone laughed, and the dark cloud hanging over us seemed to disperse.
'Right, I'm going to start again, and you can either follow me or leave. This time,
I'm the one who decides when the class ends. One of the most aggressive things a
human being can do is to go against what he or she believes is nice or pretty, and
that's what we're going to do today. We're all going to dance badly.'
It was just another experiment and in order not to embarrass our hostess,
everyone obediently danced badly. I struggled with myself, because one's natural
tendency was to follow the rhythms of that marvellous, mysterious percussion. I
felt as if I were insulting the musicians who were playing and the composer who
created it. Every so often, my body tried to fight against that lack of harmony and I
was forced to make myself behave as I'd been told to. The boy was dancing as
well, laughing all the time, then, at a certain
point, he stopped and sat down on the sofa, as if exhausted by his efforts. The
CD was switched off in midstream.
'Wait.'
We all waited.
'I'm going to do something I've never done before.'
She closed her eyes and held her head between her hands. 'I've never danced
unrhythmically before…'
So the experiment had been worse for her than for any of us. 'I don't feel well…'
Both the director and I got to our feet. Andrea shot me a furious glance, but I still
went over to Athena. Before I could reach her, however, she asked us to return to
our places.
'Does anyone want to say anything?' Her voice sounded fragile, tremulous, and she
had still not uncovered her face.
'I do.'
It was Andrea.
'First, pick up my son and tell him that his mother's fine. But I need to stay like
this for as long as necessary.'
Viorel looked frightened. Andrea sat him on her lap and stroked him. 'What do you
want to say?'
'Nothing. I've changed my mind.'
'The boy made you change your mind, but carry on anyway.'
Slowly Athena removed her hands and looked up. Her face was that of a stranger.
'No, I won't speak.'
'All right. You,' Athena said, pointing to the older actor. 'Go to the doctor
tomorrow. The fact that you can't sleep and have to keep getting up in the night to
go to the toilet is serious. It's cancer of the prostate.'
The man turned pale.
'And you,' she pointed at the director, 'accept your sexual identity. Don't be afraid.
Accept that you hate women and love men.'
'Are you saying–'
'Don't interrupt me. I'm not saying this because of Athena. I'm merely referring to
your sexuality. You love men, and there is, I believe, nothing wrong with that.'
She wasn't saying that because of Athena? But she was Athena!
'And you,' she pointed to me. 'Come over here. Kneel down before me.'
Afraid of what Andrea might do and embarrassed to have everyone's eyes on me, I
nevertheless did as she asked.
'Bow your head. Let me touch the nape of your neck.'
I felt the pressure of her fingers, but nothing else. We remained like that for nearly
a minute, and then she told me to get up and go back to my seat.
'You won't need to take sleeping pills any more. From now on, sleep will return.'
I glanced at Andrea. I thought she might say something, but she looked as amazed
as I did. One of the actresses, possibly the youngest, raised her hand.
'I'd like to say something, but I need to know who I'm speaking to.' 'Hagia Sofia.'
'I'd like to know if…'
She glanced round, ashamed, but the director nodded, asking her to continue. '…if
my mother is all right.'
'She's by your side. Yesterday, when you left the house, she made you forget your
handbag. You went back to find it and discovered that you'd locked yourself out
and couldn't get in. You wasted a whole hour looking for a locksmith, when you
could have kept the appointment you'd made, met the man who was waiting for
you and got the job you wanted. But if everything had happened as you planned
that morning, in six months' time you would have died in a car accident. Forgetting
your handbag yesterday changed your life.'
The girl began to weep.
'Does anyone else want to ask anything?' Another hand went up. It was the
director. 'Does he love me?'
So it was true. The story about the girl's mother had stirred up a whirlwind of
emotions in the room. 'You're asking the wrong question. What you need to know
is, are you in a position to give him the love he needs. And whatever happens or
doesn't happen will be equally gratifying. Knowing that you are capable of love is
enough. If it isn't him, it will be someone else. You've discovered a wellspring,
simply allow it to flow and it will fill your world. Don't try to keep a safe distance
so as to see what happens. Don't wait to be certain before you take a step. What
you give, you will receive, although it might sometimes come from the place you
least expect.'
Those words applied to me too. Then Athena – or whoever she was – turned to
Andrea. 'You!'
My blood froze.
'You must be prepared to lose the universe you created.' 'What do you mean by
“universe”?'
'What you think you already have. You've imprisoned your world, but you know
that you must liberate it. I know you understand what I mean, even though you
don't want to hear it.'
'I understand.'
I was sure they were talking about me. Was this all a set-up by Athena? 'It's
finished,' she said. 'Bring the child to me.'
Viorel didn't want to go; he was frightened by his mother's transformation. But
Andrea took him gently by the hand and led him to her.
Athena – or Hagia Sofia, or Sherine, or whoever she was – did just as she had
done with me, and pressed the back of the boy's neck with her fingers.
'Don't be frightened by the things you see, my child. Don't try to push them away
because they'll go away anyway. Enjoy the company of the angels while you can.
You're frightened now, but you're not as frightened as you might be because you
know there are lots of people in the room. You stopped laughing and dancing
when you saw me embracing your mother and asking to speak through her mouth.
But you know I wouldn't be doing this if she hadn't given me her permission. I've
always appeared before in the form of light, and I still am that light, but today I
decided to speak.'
The little boy put his arms around her.
'You can go now. Leave me alone with him.'
One by one, we left the apartment, leaving the mother with her child. In the taxi
home, I tried to talk to Andrea, but she said that we could talk about anything but
what had just happened.
I said nothing. My soul filled with sadness. Losing Andrea was very hard. On the
other hand, I felt an immense peace. The evening's events had wrought changes in
us all, and that meant I wouldn't need to go through the pain of sitting down with a
woman I loved very much and telling her that I was in love with someone else.
In this case, I chose silence. I got home, turned on the TV, and Andrea went to
have a bath. I closed my eyes and when I opened them, the room was full of light.
It was morning, and I'd slept for ten hours. Beside me was a note, in which Andrea
said that she hadn't wanted to wake me, that she'd gone straight to the theatre, but
had left me some coffee. The note was a romantic one, decorated in lipstick and a
small cutout heart.
She had no intention of 'letting go of her universe'. She was going to fight. And my
life would become a nightmare.
That evening, she phoned, and her voice betrayed no particular emotion. She told
me that the elderly actor had gone to see his doctor, who had examined him and
found that he had an enlarged prostate. The next step was a blood test, where they
had detected a significantly raised level of a type of protein called PSA. They took
a sample for a biopsy, but the clinical picture indicated that there was a high
chance he had a malignant tumour.
'The doctor said he was lucky, because even if their worst fears were proved right,
they can still operate and there's a ninety-nine per cent chance of a cure.'
Deidre O'Neill, known as Edda
What do you mean, Hagia Sofia! It was her, Athena, but by touching the deepest
part of the river that flows through her soul, she had come into contact with the
Mother.
All she did was to see what was happening in another reality. The young actress's
mother, now that she's dead, lives in a place outside of time and so was able to
change the course of events, whereas we human beings can only know about the
present. But that's no small thing: discovering a dormant illness before it gets
worse, touching nervous systems and unblocking energies is within the reach of all
of us.
Of course, many died at the stake, others were exiled and many ended up hiding or
suppressing the spark of the Great Mother in their souls. I never brought Athena
into contact with the Power. She decided to do this, because the Mother had
already given her various signs: she was a light while she danced, she changed into
letters while she was learning calligraphy, she appeared to her in a fire and in a
mirror. What my student didn't know was how to live with Her, until, that is, she
did something that provoked this whole chain of events.
Athena, who was always telling everyone to be different, was basically just like all
other mortals. She had her own rhythm, a kind of cruise control. Was she more
curious than most? Possibly. Had she managed to overcome her sense of being a
victim? Definitely. Did she feel a need to share what she was learning with others,
be they bank employees or actors? In some cases the answer was 'Yes', but in
others, I had to encourage her, because we are not meant for solitude, and we only
know ourselves when we see ourselves in the eyes of others.
But that was as far as my interference went.
Maybe the Mother wanted to appear that night, and perhaps she whispered
something in her ear: 'Go against everything you've learned so far. You, who are a
mistress of rhythm, allow the rhythm to pass through your body, but don't obey it.'
That was why Athena suggested the exercise. Her unconscious was already
prepared to receive the Mother, but Athena herself was still dancing in time to the
music and so any external elements were unable to manifest themselves.
The same thing used to happen with me. The best way to meditate and enter into
contact with the light was by knitting, something my mother had taught me when I
was a child. I knew how to count the stitches, manipulate the needles and create
beautiful things through repetition and harmony. One day, my protector asked me
to knit in a completely irrational way! I found this really distressing, because I'd
learned how to knit with affection, patience and dedication. Nevertheless, he
insisted on me knitting really badly.
I knitted like this for two hours, thinking all the time that it was utterly ridiculous,
absurd. My head ached, but I had to resist letting the needles guide my hands.
Anyone can do things badly, so why was he asking this of me? Because he knew
about my obsession with geometry and with perfection.
And suddenly, it happened: I stopped moving the needles and felt a great
emptiness, which was filled by a warm, loving, companionable presence.
Everything around me was different, and I felt like saying things that I would never
normally dare to say. I didn't lose consciousness; I knew I was still me, but,
paradoxically, I wasn't the person I was used to being with.
So I can 'see' what happened, even though I wasn't there. Athena's soul following
the sound of the music while her body went in a totally contrary direction. After a
time, her soul disconnected from her body, a space opened, and the Mother could
finally enter.
Or, rather, a spark from the Mother appeared. Ancient, but apparently very young.
Wise, but not omnipotent. Special, but not in the least arrogant. Her perceptions
changed, and she began to see the same things she used to see when she was a
child – the parallel universes that people this world. At such moments, we can see
not only the physical body, but people's emotions too. They say cats have this
same power, and I believe them.
A kind of blanket lies between the physical and the spiritual world, a blanket that
changes in colour, intensity and light; it's what mystics call 'aura'. From then on,
everything is easy. The aura tells you what's going on. If I had been there, she
would have seen a violet colour with a few yellow splodges around my body. That
means that I still have a long road ahead of me and that my mission on this Earth
has not yet been accomplished.
Mixed up with human auras are transparent forms, which people usually call
'ghosts'. That was the case with the young woman's mother, and only in such case
can someone's fate be altered. I'm almost certain that the young actress, even
before she asked, knew that her mother was beside her, and the only real surprise
to her was the story about the handbag.
Confronted by that rhythmless dance, everyone was really intimidated. Why?
Because we're used to doing things 'as they should be done'. No one likes to make
the wrong moves, especially when we're aware that we're doing so. Even Athena. It
can't have been easy for her to suggest doing something that went against
everything she loved.
I'm glad that the Mother won the battle at that point. A man has been saved from
cancer, another has accepted his sexuality, and a third has stopped taking sleeping
pills. And all because Athena broke the rhythm, slamming on the brakes when the
car was travelling at top speed and thus throwing everything into disarray.
To go back to my knitting: I used that method of knitting badly for quite some
time, until I managed to provoke the presence without any artificial means, now
that I knew it and was used to it. The same thing happened with Athena. Once we
know where the Doors of Perception are, it's really easy to open and close them,
when we get used to our own 'strange' behaviour.
And it must be said that I knitted much faster and better after that, just as Athena
danced with much more soul and rhythm once she had dared to break down those
barriers.
Andrea McCain, actress
The story spread like wild fire. On the following Monday, when the theatre was
closed, Athena's apartment was packed. We had all brought friends. She did as she
had on the previous evening; she made us dance without rhythm, as if she needed
that collective energy in order to get in touch with Hagia Sofia. The boy was there
again, and I decided to watch him. When he sat down on the sofa, the music
stopped and the trance began.
As did the questions. The first three questions were, as you can imagine, about love
– will he stay with me, does she love me, is he cheating on me. Athena said
nothing. The fourth person to receive no answer asked again, more loudly this
time:
'So is he cheating on me or not?'
'I am Hagia Sofia, universal wisdom. I came into the world accompanied only by
Love. I am the beginning of everything, and before I existed there was chaos.
Therefore, if any of you wish to control the forces that prevailed in chaos, do not
ask Hagia Sofia. For me, love fills everything. It cannot be desired because it is an
end in itself. It cannot betray because it has nothing to do with possession. It
cannot be held prisoner because it is a river and will overflow its banks. Anyone
who tries to imprison love will cut off the spring that feeds it, and the trapped
water will grow stagnant and rank.'
Hagia looked around the group, most of whom were there for the first time, and
she began to point out what she saw: the threat of disease, problems at work,
frictions between parents and children, sexuality, potentialities that existed but were
not being explored. I remember her turning to one woman in her thirties and
saying:
'Your father told you how things should be and how a woman should behave. You
have always fought against your dreams, and “I want” has never even shown its
face. It was always drowned out by “I must” or “I hope” or “I need”, but you're a
wonderful singer. One year's experience could make a huge difference to your
work.'
'But I have a husband and a child.'
'Athena has a child too. Your husband will be upset at first, but he'll come to
accept it eventually. And you don't need to be Hagia Sofia to know that.'
said.'
'Maybe I'm too old.'
'You're refusing to accept who you are, but that is not my problem. I have said
what needed to be
Gradually, everyone in that small room – unable to sit down because there wasn't
enough space, sweating profusely even though the winter was nearly over, feeling
ridiculous for having come to such an event – was called upon to receive Hagia
Sofia's advice.
I was the last.
'Stay behind afterwards if you want to stop being two and to be one instead.'
This time, I didn't have her son on my lap. He watched everything that happened,
and it seemed that the conversation they'd had after the first session had been
enough for him to lose his fear.
I nodded. Unlike the previous session, when people had simply left when she'd
asked to talk to her son alone, this time Hagia Sofia gave a sermon before ending
the ritual.
'You are not here to receive definite answers. My mission is to provoke you. In the
past, both governors and governed went to oracles who would foretell the future.
The future, however, is unreliable because it is guided by decisions made in the
here and now. Keep the bicycle moving, because if you stop pedalling, you will fall
off.
'For those of you who came to meet Hagia Sofia wanting her merely to confirm
what you hoped to be true, please, do not come back. Or else start dancing and
make those around you dance too. Fate will be implacable with those who want to
live in a universe that is dead and gone. The new world belongs to the Mother,
who came with Love to separate the heavens from the waters. Anyone who
believes they have failed will always fail. Anyone who has decided that they cannot
behave any differently will be destroyed by routine. Anyone who has decided to
block all changes will be transformed into dust. Cursed be those who do not dance
and who prevent others from dancing!'
Her eyes glanced fire.
'You can go.'
Everyone left, and I could see the look of confusion on most of their faces. They
had come in search of comfort and had found only provocation. They had arrived
wanting to be told how love can be controlled and had heard that the all-devouring
flame will always burn everything. They wanted to be sure that their decisions were
the right ones, that their husbands, wives and bosses were pleased with them, but,
instead, they were given only words of doubt.
Some people, though, were smiling. They had understood the importance of the
dance and from that night on would doubtless allow their bodies and souls to drift
– even though, as always happens, they would have to pay a price.
Only the boy, Hagia Sofia, Heron and myself were left in the room. 'I asked you to
stay here alone.'
Without a word, Heron picked up his coat and left.
Hagia Sofia was looking at me. And, little by little, I watched her change back into
Athena. The only way of describing that change is to compare it with the change
that takes place in an angry child: we can see the anger in the child's eyes, but once
distracted and once the anger has gone, the child is no longer the same child who,
only moments before, was crying. The 'being', if it can be called that, seemed to
have vanished into the air as soon as its instrument lost concentration.
And now I was standing before an apparently exhausted woman. 'Make me some
tea.'
She was giving me an order! And she was no longer universal wisdom, but merely
someone my boyfriend was interested in or infatuated with. Where would this
relationship take us?
But making a cup of tea wouldn't destroy my self-esteem. I went into the kitchen,
boiled some water, added a few camomile leaves and returned to the living room.
The child was asleep on her lap.
'You don't like me,' she said. I made no reply.
'I don't like you either,' she went on. 'You're pretty and elegant, a fine actress, and
have a degree of culture and education which I, despite my family's wishes, do not.
But you're also insecure, arrogant and suspicious. As Hagia Sofia said, you are two,
when you could be one.'
'I didn't know you remembered what you said during the trance, because in that
case, you are two people as well: Athena and Hagia Sofia.'
'I may have two names, but I am only one – or else all the people in the world.
And that is precisely what I want to talk about. Because I am one and everyone,
the spark that emerges when I go into a trance gives me very precise instructions. I
remain semi-conscious throughout, of course, but I'm saying things that come
from some unknown part of myself, as if I were suckling on the breast of the
Mother, drinking the milk that flows through all our souls and carries knowledge
around the Earth. Last week, which was the first time I entered into contact with
this new form, I received what seemed to me to be an absurd message: that I
should teach you.'
She paused.
'Obviously, this struck me as quite mad, because I don't like you at all.' She paused
again, for longer this time.
'Today, though, the source repeated the same message, and so I'm giving you that
choice.' 'Why do you call it Hagia Sofia?'
'That was my idea. It's the name of a really beautiful mosque I saw in a book. You
could, if you like, be my student. That's what brought you here on that first day.
This whole new stage in my life, including the discovery of Hagia Sofia inside me,
only happened because one day you came through that door and said: “I work in
the theatre and we're putting on a play about the female face of God. I heard from
a journalist friend that you've spent time in the Balkan mountains with some
gipsies and would be prepared to tell me about your experiences there.”'
'Are you going to teach me everything you know?'
'No, everything I don't know. I'll learn through being in contact with you, as I said
the first time we met, and as I say again now. Once I've learned what I need to
learn, we'll go our separate ways.'
'Can you teach someone you dislike?'
'I can love and respect someone I dislike. On the two occasions when I went into
a trance, I saw your aura, and it was the most highly developed aura I've ever seen.
You could make a difference in this world, if you accept my proposal.'
'Will you teach me to see auras?'
'Until it happened to me the first time, I myself didn't know I was capable of doing
so. If you're on the right path, you'll learn too.'
I realised then that I, too, was capable of loving someone I disliked. I said 'Yes'.
'Then let us transform that acceptance into a ritual. A ritual throws us into an
unknown world, but we know that we cannot treat the things of that world lightly.
It isn't enough to say “yes”, you must put your life at risk, and without giving it
much thought either. If you're the woman I think you are, you won't say: “I need
to think about it.” You'll say–'
'I'm ready. Let's move on to the ritual. Where did you learn the ritual, by the way?'
'I'm going to learn it now. I no longer need to remove myself from my normal
rhythm in order to enter into contact with the spark from the Mother, because,
once that spark is installed inside you, it's easy to find again. I know which door I
need to open, even though it's concealed amongst many other entrances and exits.
All I need is a little silence.'
Silence again!
We sat there, our eyes wide and staring, as if we were about to begin a fight to the
death. Rituals! Before I even rang the bell of Athena's apartment for the first time,
I had already taken part in various rituals, only to feel used and diminished
afterwards, standing outside a door I could see, but not open. Rituals!
All Athena did was drink a little of the tea I prepared for her.
'The ritual is over. I asked you to do something for me. You did, and I accepted it.
Now it is your turn to ask me something.'
I immediately thought of Heron, but it wasn't the right moment to talk about him.
'Take your clothes off.'
She didn't ask me why. She looked at the child, checked that he was asleep, and
immediately began to remove her sweater.
'No, really, you don't have to,' I said. 'I don't know why I asked that.'
But she continued to undress, first her blouse, then her jeans, then her bra. I
noticed her breasts, which were the most beautiful I'd ever seen. Finally, she
removed her knickers. And there she was, offering me her nakedness.
'Bless me,' said Athena.
Bless my 'teacher'? But I'd already taken the first step and couldn't stop now, so I
dipped my fingers in the cup and sprinkled a little tea over her body.
'Just as this plant was transformed into tea, just as the water mingled with the plant,
I bless you and ask the Great Mother that the spring from which this water came
will never cease flowing, and that the earth from which this plant came will always
be fertile and generous.'
I was surprised at my own words. They had come neither from inside me nor
outside. It was as if I'd always known them and had done this countless times
before.
'You have been blessed. You can get dressed now.'
But she didn't move, she merely smiled. What did she want? If Hagia Sofia was
capable of seeing auras, she would know that I hadn't the slightest desire to have
sex with another woman.
'One moment.'
She picked up the boy, carried him to his room and returned at once. 'You take
your clothes off too.'
Who was asking this? Hagia Sofia, who spoke of my potential and for whom I was
the perfect disciple? Or Athena, whom I hardly knew, and who seemed capable of
anything – a woman whom life had taught to go beyond her limits and to satisfy
any curiosity?
We had started a kind of confrontation from which there was no retreat. I got
undressed with the same nonchalance, the same smile and the same look in my
eyes.
She took my hand and we sat down on the sofa.
During the next half hour, both Athena and Hagia Sofia were present; they wanted
to know what my next steps would be. As they asked me this question, I saw that
everything really was written there before
me, and that the doors had only been closed before because I hadn't realised that I
was the one person in the world with the authority to open them.
Heron Ryan, journalist
The deputy editor hands me a video and we go into the projection room to watch
it.
The video was made on the morning of 26 April 1986 and shows normal life in a
normal town. A man is sitting drinking a cup of coffee. A mother is taking her
baby for a walk. People in a hurry are going to work. A few people are waiting at a
bus stop. A man on a bench in a square is reading a newspaper.
But there's a problem with the video. There are various horizontal lines on the
screen, as if the tracking button needed to be adjusted. I get up to do this, but the
deputy editor stops me.
'That's just the way it is. Keep watching.'
Images of the small provincial town continue to appear, showing nothing of
interest apart from these scenes from ordinary everyday life.
'It's possible that some people may know that there's been an accident two
kilometres from there,' says my boss. 'It's possible that they know there have been
thirty deaths – a large number, but not enough to change the routine of the town's
inhabitants.'
Now the film shows school buses parking. They will stay there for many days. The
images are getting worse and worse.
'It isn't the tracking, it's radiation. The video was made by the KGB. On the night
of the twentysixth of April, at twenty-three minutes past one in the morning, the
worst ever man-made disaster occurred at Chernobyl, in the Ukraine. When a
nuclear reactor exploded, the people in the area were exposed to ninety times
more radiation than that given out by the bomb dropped on Hiroshima. The
whole region should have been evacuated at once, but no one said anything – after
all, the government doesn't make mistakes. Only a week later, on page thirty-two of
the local newspaper, a five-line article appeared, mentioning the deaths of workers,
but giving no further explanation. Meanwhile, Workers' Day was celebrated
throughout the Soviet Union, and in Kiev, the Ukrainian capital, people paraded
down the street unaware of the invisible death in the air.'
And he concludes:
'I want you to go and see what Chernobyl is like now. You've just been promoted
to special correspondent. You'll get a twenty per cent increase in your salary and
be able to suggest the kind of article you think we should be publishing.'
I should be jumping for joy, but instead I'm gripped by a feeling of intense
sadness, which I have to hide. It's impossible to argue with him, to say that there
are two women in my life at the moment, that I don't want to leave London, that
my life and my mental equilibrium are at stake. I ask when I should leave. As soon
as possible, he says, because there are rumours that other countries are
significantly increasing their production of nuclear energy.
I manage to negotiate an honourable way out, saying that, first, I need to talk to
experts and really get to grips with the subject, and that I'll set off once I've
collected the necessary material.
He agrees, shakes my hand and congratulates me. I don't have time to talk to
Andrea, because when I get home, she's still at the theatre. I fall asleep at once and
again wake up to find a note saying that she's gone to work and that the coffee is
on the table.
I go to the office, try to ingratiate myself with the boss who has 'improved my life',
and phone various experts on radiation and energy. I discover that, in total, 9
million people worldwide were directly affected by the disaster, including 3 to 4
million children. The initial 30 deaths became, according to the expert John
Gofmans, 475,000 cases of fatal cancers and an equal number of non-fatal
cancers.
A total of 2,000 towns and villages were simply wiped off the map. According to
the Health Ministry in Belarus, the incidence of cancer of the thyroid will increase
considerably between 2005 and 2010, as a consequence of continuing high levels
of radioactivity. Another specialist explains that as well as the 9 million people
directly exposed to radiation, more than 65 million in many countries round the
world were indirectly affected by consuming contaminated foodstuffs.
It's a serious matter, which deserves to be treated with respect. At the end of the
day, I go back to the deputy editor and suggest that I travel to Chernobyl for the
actual anniversary of the accident, and
meanwhile do more research, talk to more experts and find out how the British
government responded to the tragedy. He agrees.
I phone Athena. After all, she claims to be going out with someone from Scotland
Yard and now is the time to ask her a favour, given that Chernobyl is no longer
classified as secret and the Soviet Union no longer exists. She promises that she'll
talk to her 'boyfriend', but says she can't guarantee she'll get the answers I want.
She also says that she's leaving for Scotland the following day, and will only be
back in time for the next group meeting.
'What group?'
The group, she says. So that's become a regular thing, has it? What I want to know
is when we can meet to talk and clear up various loose ends.
But she's already hung up. I go home, watch the news, have supper alone and,
later, go out again to pick Andrea up from the theatre. I get there in time to see the
end of the play and, to my surprise, the person on stage seems totally unlike the
person I've been living with for nearly two years; there's something magical about
her every gesture; monologues and dialogues are spoken with an unaccustomed
intensity. I am seeing a stranger, a woman I would like to have by my side, then I
realise that she is by my side and is in no way a stranger to me.
'How did your chat with Athena go?' I ask on the way home. 'Fine. How was
work?'
She was the one to change the subject. I tell her about my promotion and about
Chernobyl, but she doesn't seem interested. I start to think that I'm losing the love
I have without having yet won the love I hope to win. However, as soon as we
reach our apartment, she suggests we take a bath together and, before I know it,
we're in bed. First, she puts on that percussion music at full volume (she explains
that she managed to get hold of a copy) and tells me not to worry about the
neighbours – people worry too much about them, she says, and never live their
own lives.
What happens from then on is something that goes beyond my understanding.
Has this woman making positively savage love with me finally discovered her
sexuality, and was this taught to her or provoked in her by that other woman?
While she was clinging to me with a violence I've never known before, she kept
saying:
'Today I'm your man, and you're my woman.'
We carried on like this for almost an hour, and I experienced things I'd never
dared experience before. At certain moments, I felt ashamed, wanted to ask her to
stop, but she seemed to be in complete control of the situation and so I
surrendered, because I had no choice. In fact, I felt really curious.
I was exhausted afterwards, but Andrea seemed re-energised.
'Before you go to sleep, I want you to know something,' she said. 'If you go
forward, sex will offer you the chance to make love with gods and goddesses.
That's what you experienced today. I want you to go to sleep knowing that I
awoke the Mother that was in you.'
I wanted to ask if she'd learned this from Athena, but my courage failed. 'Tell me
that you liked being a woman for a night.'
'I did. I don't know if I would always like it, but it was something that
simultaneously frightened me and gave me great joy.'
'Tell me that you've always wanted to experience what you've just experienced.'
It's one thing to allow oneself to be carried away by the situation, but quite another
to comment coolly on the matter. I said nothing, although I was sure that she
knew my answer.
'Well,' Andrea went on, 'all of this was inside me and I had no idea. As was the
person behind the mask that fell away while I was on stage today. Did you notice
anything different?'
'Of course. You were radiating a special light.'
'Charisma – the divine force that manifests itself in men and women. The
supernatural power we don't need to show to anyone because everyone can see it,
even usually insensitive people. But it only happens when we're naked, when we
die to the world and are reborn to ourselves. Last night, I died. Tonight, when I
walked on stage and saw that I was doing exactly what I had chosen to do, I was
reborn from my ashes. I was always trying to be who I am, but could never
manage it. I was always trying to impress other people, have intelligent
conversations, please my parents and, at the same time, I used every available
means to do the things I would really like to do. I've always forged my path with
blood, tears and will power, but last night, I realised that I was going about it the
wrong way. My dream doesn't require that
of me, I have only to surrender myself to it and, if I find I'm suffering, grit my
teeth, because the suffering will pass.'
'Why are you telling me this?'
'Let me finish. In that journey where suffering seemed to be the only rule, I
struggled for things for which there was no point struggling. Like love, for
example. People either feel it or they don't, and there isn't a force in the world that
can make them feel it. We can pretend that we love each other. We can get used to
each other. We can live a whole lifetime of friendship and complicity, we can bring
up children, have sex every night, reach orgasm, and still feel that there's a terrible
emptiness about it all, that something important is missing. In the name of all I've
learned about relationships between men and women, I've been trying to fight
against things that weren't really worth the struggle. And that includes you.
'Today, while we were making love, while I was giving all I have, and I could see
that you, too, were giving of your best, I realised that your best no longer interests
me. I will sleep beside you tonight, but tomorrow I'll leave. The theatre is my ritual,
and there I can express and develop whatever I want to express and develop.'
I started to regret everything – going to Transylvania and meeting a woman who
might be destroying my life, arranging that first meeting of the 'group', confessing
my love in that restaurant. At that moment, I hated Athena.
'I know what you're thinking,' said Andrea. 'That your friend Athena has
brainwashed me, but that isn't true.'
'I'm a man, even though tonight in bed I behaved like a woman. I'm a species in
danger of extinction because I don't see many men around. Few people would risk
what I have risked.'
'I'm sure you're right, and that's why I admire you, but aren't you going to ask me
who I am, what I want and what I desire?'
I asked.
'I want everything. I want savagery and tenderness. I want to upset the neighbours
and placate them too. I don't want a woman in my bed, I want men, real men, like
you, for example. Whether they love me or are merely using me, it doesn't matter.
My love is greater than that. I want to love freely, and I want to allow the people
around me to do the same.
'What I talked about to Athena were the simple ways of awakening repressed
energy, like making love, for example, or walking down the street saying: “I'm here
and now”. Nothing very special, no secret ritual. The only thing that made our
meeting slightly different was that we were both naked. From now on, she and I
will meet every Monday, and if I have any comments to make, I will do so after
that session. I have no desire to be her friend. Just as, when she feels the need to
share something, she goes up to Scotland to talk with that Edda woman, who, it
seems, you know as well, although you've never mentioned her.'
'I can't even remember meeting her!'
I sensed that Andrea was gradually calming down. I prepared two cups of coffee
and we drank them together. She recovered her smile and asked about my
promotion. She said she was worried about those Monday meetings, because she'd
learned only that morning that friends of friends were inviting other people, and
Athena's apartment was a very small place. I made an enormous effort to pretend
that everything that had happened that evening was just a fit of nerves or
premenstrual tension or jealousy on her part.
I put my arms around her and she snuggled into my shoulder. And despite my own
exhaustion, I waited until she fell asleep. That night, I dreamed of nothing. I had
no feelings of foreboding.
And the following morning, when I woke up, I saw that her clothes were gone, the
key was on the table, and there was no letter of farewell.
Deidre O'Neill, known as Edda
People read a lot of stories about witches, fairies, paranormals and children
possessed by evil spirits. They go to films showing rituals featuring pentagrams,
swords and invocations. That's fine; people need to give free rein to their
imagination and to go through certain stages. Anyone who gets through those
stages without being deceived will eventually get in touch with the Tradition.
The real Tradition is this: the teacher never tells the disciple what he or she should
do. They are merely travelling companions, sharing the same uncomfortable
feeling of 'estrangement' when confronted
by ever-changing perceptions, broadening horizons, closing doors, rivers that
sometimes seem to block their path and which, in fact, should never be crossed,
but followed.
There is only one difference between teacher and disciple: the former is slightly
less afraid than the latter. Then, when they sit down at a table or in front of a fire
to talk, the more experienced person might say: 'Why don't you do that?' But he or
she never says: 'Go there and you'll arrive where I did', because every path and
every destination are unique to the individual.
The true teacher gives the disciple the courage to throw his or her world off
balance, even though the disciple is afraid of things already encountered and more
afraid still of what might be around the next
corner.
I was a young, enthusiastic doctor who, filled by a desire to help my fellow human
beings, travelled to the interior of Romania on an exchange programme run by the
British government. I set off with my luggage full of medicines and my head full of
preconceptions. I had clear ideas about how people should behave, about what we
need to be happy, about the dreams we should keep alive inside us, about how
human relations should evolve. I arrived in Bucharest during that crazed, bloody
dictatorship and went to Transylvania to assist with a mass vaccination programme
for the local population.
I didn't realise that I was merely one more piece on a very complicated chessboard,
where invisible hands were manipulating my idealism, and that ulterior motives lay
behind everything I believed was being done for humanitarian purposes: stabilising
the government run by the dictator's son, allowing Britain to sell arms in a market
dominated by the Soviets.
All my good intentions collapsed when I saw that there was barely enough vaccine
to go round; that there were other diseases sweeping the region; that however
often I wrote asking for more resources, they never came. I was told not to
concern myself with anything beyond what I'd been asked to do.
I felt powerless and angry. I'd seen poverty from close to and would have been
able to do something about it if only someone would give me some money, but
they weren't interested in results. Our government just wanted a few articles in the
press, so that they could say to their political parties or to their electorate that
they'd despatched groups to various places in the world on a humanitarian mission.
Their intentions were good – apart from selling arms, of course.
I was in despair. What kind of world was this? One night, I set off into the icy
forest, cursing God, who was unfair to everything and everyone. I was sitting
beneath an oak tree when my protector approached me. He said I could die of
cold, and I replied that I was a doctor and knew the body's limits, and that as soon
as I felt I was getting near those limits, I would go back to the camp. I asked him
what he was doing there. 'I'm speaking to a woman who can hear me, in a world in
which all the men have gone deaf.'
I thought he meant me, but the woman he was referring to was the forest itself.
When I saw this man wandering about amongst the trees, making gestures and
saying things I couldn't understand, a kind of peace settled on my heart. I was not,
after all, the only person in the world left talking to myself. When I got up to
return to the camp, he came over to me again.
'I know who you are,' he said. 'People in the village say that you're a very decent
person, always good-humoured and prepared to help others, but I see something
else: rage and frustration.'
He might have been a government spy, but I decided to tell him everything I was
feeling, even though I ran the risk of being arrested. We walked together to the
field hospital where I was working; I took him to the dormitory, which was empty
at the time (my colleagues were all having fun at the annual festival being held in
the town), and I asked if he'd like a drink. He produced a bottle from his pocket.
'Palinka,' he said, meaning the traditional drink of Romania, with an incredibly high
alcohol content.
'On me.'
We drank together, and I didn't even notice that I was getting steadily drunk. I only
realised the state I was in when I tried to go to the toilet, tripped over something
and fell flat.
'Don't move,' said the man. 'Look at what is there before your eyes.' A line of ants.
'They all think they're very wise. They have memory, intelligence, organisational
powers, a spirit of sacrifice. They look for food in summer, store it away for the
winter, and now they are setting forth again, in this icy spring, to work. If the world
were destroyed by an atomic bomb tomorrow, the ants would survive.' 'How do
you know all this?'
'I studied biology.'
'Why the hell don't you work to improve the living conditions of your own people?
What are you doing in the middle of the forest, talking to the trees?'
'In the first place, I wasn't alone; apart from the trees, you were listening to me too.
But to answer your question, I left biology to work as a blacksmith.'
I struggled to my feet. My head was still spinning, but I was thinking clearly enough
to understand the poor man's situation. Despite a university education, he had
been unable to find work. I told him that the same thing happened in my country
too.
'No, that's not what I meant. I left biology because I wanted to work as a
blacksmith. Even as a child, I was fascinated by those men hammering steel,
making a strange kind of music, sending out sparks all around, plunging the
red-hot metal into water and creating clouds of steam. I was unhappy as a
biologist, because my dream was to make rigid metal take on soft shapes. Then,
one day, a protector appeared.'
'A protector?'
'Let's say that, on seeing those ants doing exactly what they're programmed to do,
you were to exclaim: “How fantastic!” The guards are genetically prepared to
sacrifice themselves for the queen, the workers carry leaves ten times their own
weight, the engineers make tunnels that can resist storms and floods. They enter
into mortal combat with their enemies, they suffer for the community, and they
never ask: “Why are we doing this?” People try to imitate the perfect society of the
ants, and, as a biologist, I was playing my part, until someone came along with this
question: “Are you happy doing what you're doing?” “Of course I am,” I said. “I'm
being useful to my own people.” “And that's enough?”
'I didn't know whether it was enough or not, but I said that he seemed to me to be
both arrogant and egotistical. He replied: “Possibly. But all you will achieve is to
repeat what has been done since man was man – keeping things organised.”
'“But the world has progressed,” I said. He asked if I knew any history. Of course I
did. He asked another question: “Thousands of years ago, weren't we capable of
building enormous structures like the pyramids? Weren't we capable of
worshipping gods, weaving, making fire, finding lovers and wives, sending written
messages? Of course we were. But although we've succeeded in replacing slaves
with wage slaves, all the advances we've made have been in the field of science.
Human beings are still asking the same questions as their ancestors. In short, they
haven't evolved at all.” At that point, I understood that the person asking me these
questions was someone sent from heaven, an angel, a protector.'
'Why do you call him a protector?'
'Because he told me that there were two traditions, one that makes us repeat the
same thing for centuries at a time, and another that opens the door into the
unknown. However, the second tradition is difficult, uncomfortable and dangerous,
and if it attracted too many followers, it would end up destroying the society which,
following the example of the ants, took so long to build. And so the second
tradition went underground and has only managed to survive over so many
centuries because its followers created a secret language of signs.'
'Did you ask more questions?'
'Of course I did, because, although I'd denied it, he knew I was dissatisfied with
what I was doing. My protector said: “I'm afraid of taking steps that are not on the
map, but by taking those steps despite my fears, I have a much more interesting
life.” I asked more about the Tradition, and he said something like: “As long as
God is merely man, we'll always have enough food to eat and somewhere to live.
When the Mother finally regains her freedom, we might have to sleep rough and
live on love, or we might be able to balance emotion and work.” The man, who, it
turned out, was my protector, asked: “If you weren't a biologist, what would you
be?” I said: “A blacksmith, but they don't earn enough money.” And he replied:
“Well, when you grow tired of being what you're not, go and have fun and
celebrate life, hammering metal into shape. In time, you'll discover that it will give
you more than pleasure, it will give you meaning.” “How do I follow this tradition
you spoke of?” I asked. “As I said, through symbols,” he replied. “Start doing what
you want to do, and everything else will be revealed to you. Believe that God is the
Mother and looks after her children and never lets anything bad happen to them. I
did that and I survived. I discovered that there were other people who did the
same, but who are considered to be mad, irresponsible, superstitious. Since time
immemorial, they've sought their inspiration in nature. We build pyramids, but we
also develop symbols.”
'Having said that, he left, and I never saw him again. I only know, from that
moment on, symbols did begin to appear because my eyes had been opened by
that conversation. Hard though it was, one evening, I
told my family that, although I had everything a man could dream of having, I was
unhappy, and that I had, in fact, been born to be a blacksmith. My wife protested,
saying: “You were born a gipsy and had to face endless humiliations to get where
you are, and yet you want to go back?” My son, however, was thrilled, because he,
too, liked to watch the blacksmiths in our village and hated the laboratories in the
big cities.
'I started dividing my time between biological research and working as a
blacksmith's apprentice. I was always tired, but I was much happier. One day, I left
my job and set up my own blacksmith's business, which went completely wrong
from the start. Just when I was starting to believe in life, things got markedly worse.
One day, I was working away and I saw that there before me was a symbol.
'The unworked steel arrives in my workshop and I have to transform it into parts
for cars, agricultural machinery, kitchen utensils. Do you know how that's done?
First, I heat the metal until it's redhot, then I beat it mercilessly with my heaviest
hammer until the metal takes on the form I need. Then I plunge it into a bucket of
cold water and the whole workshop is filled with the roar of steam, while the metal
sizzles and crackles in response to the sudden change in temperature. I have to
keep repeating that process until the object I'm making is perfect: once is not
enough.'
The blacksmith paused for a long time, lit a cigarette, then went on:
'Sometimes the steel I get simply can't withstand such treatment. The heat, the
hammer blows, the cold water cause it to crack. And I know that I'll never be able
to make it into a good ploughshare or an engine shaft. Then I throw it on the pile
of scrap metal at the entrance to my forge.'
Another long pause, then the blacksmith concluded:
'I know that God is putting me through the fire of afflictions. I've accepted the
blows that life has dealt me, and sometimes I feel as cold and indifferent as the
water that inflicts such pain on the steel. But my one prayer is this: “Please, God,
my Mother, don't give up until I've taken on the shape that You wish for me. Do
this by whatever means You think best, for as long as You like, but never ever
throw me on the scrap heap of souls.”'
I may have been drunk when I finished my conversation with that man, but I
knew that my life had changed. There was a tradition behind everything we learn,
and I needed to go in search of people who, consciously or unconsciously, were
able to make manifest the female side of God. Instead of cursing my government
and all the political shenanigans, I decided to do what I really wanted to do: to heal
people. I wasn't interested in anything else.
Since I didn't have the necessary resources, I approached the local men and
women, and they guided me to the world of medicinal herbs. I discovered that
there was a popular tradition that went back hundreds of years and was passed
from generation to generation through experience rather than through technical
knowledge. With their help, I was able to do far more than I would otherwise have
been able to do, because I wasn't there merely to fulfil a university task or to help
my government to sell arms or, unwittingly, to spread party political propaganda. I
was there because healing people made me happy.
This brought me closer to nature, to the oral tradition and to plants. Back in
Britain, I decided to talk to other doctors and I asked them: 'Do you always know
exactly which medicines to prescribe or are you sometimes guided by intuition?'
Almost all of them, once they had dropped their guard, admitted that they were
often guided by a voice and that when they ignored the advice of the voice, they
ended up giving the wrong treatment. Obviously they make use of all the available
technology, but they know that there is a corner, a dark corner, where lies the real
meaning of the cure, and the best decision to make.
My protector threw my world off balance – even though he was only a gipsy
blacksmith. I used to go at least once a year to his village and we would talk about
how, when we dare to see things differently, life opens up to our eyes. On one of
those visits, I met other disciples of his, and together we discussed our fears and
our conquests. My protector said: 'I, too, get scared, but it's at such moments that I
discover a wisdom that is beyond me, and I go forward.'
Now I earn a lot of money working as a GP in Edinburgh, and I would earn even
more if I went to work in London, but I prefer to make the most of life and to
take time out. I do what I like: I combine the healing processes of the ancients, the
Arcane Tradition, with the most modern techniques of present-day medicine, the
Hippocratic Tradition. I'm writing a paper on the subject, and many people in the
'scientific' community, when they see my text published in a specialist journal, will
dare to take the steps which, deep down, they've always wanted to take.
I don't believe that the mind is the source of all ills; there are real diseases too. I
think antibiotics and antivirals were great advances for humanity. I don't believe
that a patient of mine with appendicitis can be cured by meditation alone; what he
needs is some good, emergency surgery. So I take each step with courage and fear,
combining technique and inspiration. And I'm careful who I say these things to,
because I might get dubbed a witchdoctor, and then many lives I could have saved
would be lost.
When I'm not sure, I ask the Great Mother for help. She has never yet failed to
answer me. But she has always counselled me to be discreet. She probably gave the
same advice to Athena on more than one occasion, but Athena was too fascinated
by the world she was just starting to discover and she didn't listen.
A London newspaper, 24 August 1991
THE WITCH OF PORTOBELLO
London (© Jeremy Lutton): 'That's another reason why I don't believe in God, I
mean, look at the behaviour of people who do believe!' This was the reaction of
Robert Wilson, one of the traders in Portobello Road.
This road, known around the world for its antique shops and its Saturday flea
market, was transformed last night into a battlefield, requiring the intervention of at
least fifty police officers from the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea to
restore order. By the end of the fracas, five people had been injured, although
none seriously. The reason behind this pitched battle, which lasted nearly two
hours, was a demonstration organised by the Rev. Ian Buck to protest about what
he called 'the Satanic cult at the heart of England'.
According to Rev. Buck, a group of suspicious individuals have been keeping the
neighbourhood awake every Monday night for the last six months, Monday being
their chosen night for invoking the Devil. The ceremonies are led by a Lebanese
woman, Sherine H. Khalil, who calls herself Athena, after the goddess of wisdom.
About two hundred people began meeting in a former East India Company
warehouse, but the numbers increased over time and, in recent weeks, an equally
large crowd has been gathering outside, hoping to gain entry and take part in the
ceremony. When his various verbal complaints, petitions and letters to the local
newspapers achieved nothing, the Rev. Buck decided to mobilise the community,
calling on his parishioners to gather outside the warehouse by 1900 hours
yesterday to stop the 'devil-worshippers' getting in.
'As soon as we received the first complaint, we sent someone to inspect the place,
but no drugs were found nor evidence of any other kind of illicit activity,' said an
official who preferred not to be identified because an inquiry has just been set up
to investigate what happened. 'They aren't contravening the noise nuisance laws
because they turn off the music at ten o'clock prompt, so there's really nothing
more we can do. Britain, after all, allows freedom of worship.'
The Rev. Buck has another version of events.
'The fact is that this witch of Portobello, this mistress of charlatanism, has contacts
with people high up in the government, which explains why the police – paid for
by taxpayers' money to maintain order and decency – refuse to do anything. We're
living in an age in which everything is allowed, and democracy is being devoured
and destroyed by that limitless freedom.'
The vicar says that he was suspicious of the group right from the start. They had
rented a crumbling old building and spent whole days trying to renovate it, 'which
is clear evidence that they belong to some sect and have undergone some kind of
brainwashing, because no one in today's world works for free'. When asked if his
parishioners ever did any charitable work in the community, the Rev. Buck replied:
'Yes, but we do it in the name of Jesus.'
Yesterday evening, when she arrived at the warehouse to meet her waiting
followers, Sherine Khalil, her son, and some of her friends were prevented from
entering by the Rev. Buck's parishioners who were carrying placards and using
megaphones to call on the rest of the neighbourhood to join them. This verbal
aggression immediately degenerated into fighting, and soon it was impossible to
control either side.
'They say they're fighting in the name of Jesus, but what they really want is for
people to continue to ignore the teachings of Christ, according to which “we are
all gods”,' said the well-known actress Andrea McCain, one of Sherine Khalil or
Athena's followers. Ms McCain received a cut above her right eye, which was
treated at once, and she left the area before your reporter could find out more
about her links with the sect.
Once order was restored, Mrs Khalil was anxious to reassure her 5-year-old son,
but she did tell us that all that takes place in the warehouse is some collective
dancing, followed by the invocation of a being known as Hagia Sofia, of whom
people are free to ask questions. The celebration ends with a kind of sermon and a
group prayer to the Great Mother. The officer charged with investigating the
original complaints confirmed this.
As far as we could ascertain, the group has no name and is not registered as a
charity. According to the lawyer Sheldon Williams, this is not necessary: 'We live in
a free country, and people can gather together in an enclosed space for
non-profit-making activities, as long as these do not break any laws such as
incitement to racism or the consumption of narcotics.'
Mrs Khalil emphatically rejected any suggestion that she should stop the meetings
because of the disturbances.
'We gather together to offer mutual encouragement,' she said, 'because it's very
hard to face social pressures alone. I demand that your newspaper denounce the
religious discrimination to which we've been subjected over the centuries.
Whenever we do something that is not in accord with State-instituted and
Stateapproved religions, there is always an attempt to crush us, as happened today.
Before, we would have faced martyrdom, prison, being burned at the stake or sent
into exile, but now we are in a position to respond, and force will be answered
with force, just as compassion will be repaid with compassion.'
When faced with the Rev. Buck's accusations, she accused him of 'manipulating his
parishioners and using intolerance and lies as an excuse for violence'.
According to the sociologist Arthaud Lenox, phenomena like this will become
increasingly common in the future, possibly involving more serious clashes
between established religions. 'Now that the Marxist utopia has shown itself
incapable of channelling society's ideals, the world is ripe for a religious revival,
born of civilisation's natural fear of significant dates. However, I believe that when
the year 2000 does arrive and the world survives intact, common sense will prevail
and religions will revert to being a refuge for the weak, who are always in search of
guidance.'
This view is contested by Dom Evaristo Piazza, the Vatican's auxiliary bishop in
the United Kingdom: 'What we are seeing is not the spiritual awakening that we all
long for, but a wave of what Americans call New Ageism, a kind of breeding
ground in which everything is permitted, where dogmas are not respected, and the
most absurd ideas from the past return to lay waste to the human mind.
Unscrupulous people like this young woman are trying to instil their false ideas in
weak, suggestible minds, with the one aim of making money and gaining personal
power.'
The German historian Franz Herbert, currently working at the Goethe Institute in
London, has a different idea: 'The established religions no longer ask fundamental
questions about our identity and our reason for living. Instead, they concentrate
purely on a series of dogmas and rules concerned only with fitting in with a
particular social and political organisation. People in search of real spirituality are,
therefore, setting off in new directions, and that inevitably means a return to the
past and to primitive religions, before those religions were contaminated by the
structures of power.'
At the police station where the incident was recorded, Sergeant William Morton
stated that should Sherine Khalil's group decide to hold their meeting on the
following Monday and feel that they are under threat, then they must apply in
writing for police protection and thus avoid a repetition of last night's events. (With
additional information from Andrew Fish. Photos by Mark Guillhem)
Heron Ryan, journalist
I read the report on the plane, when I was flying back from the Ukraine, feeling
full of doubts. I still hadn't managed to ascertain whether the Chernobyl disaster
had been as big as it was said to have been, or whether it had been used by the
major oil producers to inhibit the use of other sources of energy.
Anyway, I was horrified by what I read in the article. The photos showed broken
windows, a furious Rev. Buck, and – there lay the danger – a beautiful woman with
fiery eyes and her son in her arms. I saw at once what could happen, both good
and bad. I went straight from the airport to Portobello, convinced that both my
predictions would become reality.
On the positive side, the following Monday's meeting was one of the most
successful events in the area's history: many local people came, some curious to
see the 'being' mentioned in the article, others bearing placards defending freedom
of religion and freedom of speech. The venue would only hold two
hundred people and so the rest of the crowd were all crammed together on the
pavement outside, hoping for at least a glimpse of the woman who appeared to be
the priestess of the oppressed.
When she arrived, she was received with applause, handwritten notes and requests
for help; some people threw flowers, and one lady of uncertain age asked her to
keep on fighting for women's freedom and for the right to worship the Mother.
The parishioners from the week before must have been intimidated by the crowd
and so failed to turn up, despite the threats they had made during the previous
days. There were no aggressive comments, and the ceremony passed off as
normal, with dancing, the appearance of Hagia Sofia (by then, I knew that she was
simply another facet of Athena herself), and a final celebration (this had been
added recently, when the group moved to the warehouse lent by one of its original
members), and that was that.
During her sermon, Athena spoke as if possessed by someone else:
'We all have a duty to love and to allow love to manifest itself in the way it thinks
best. We cannot and must not be frightened when the powers of darkness want to
make themselves heard, those same powers that introduced the word “sin” merely
to control our hearts and minds. Jesus Christ, whom we all know, turned to the
woman taken in adultery and said: “Has no man condemned thee? Neither do I
condemn thee.” He healed people on the Sabbath, he allowed a prostitute to wash
his feet, he promised a thief that he would enjoy the delights of Paradise, he ate
forbidden foods, and he said that we should concern ourselves only with today,
because the lilies in the field toil not neither do they spin, but are arrayed in glory.
'What is sin? It is a sin to prevent Love from showing itself. And the Mother is
love. We are entering a new world in which we can choose to follow our own
steps, not those that society forces us to take. If necessary, we will confront the
forces of darkness again, as we did last week. But no one will silence our voice or
our heart.'
I was witnessing the transformation of a woman into an icon. She spoke with great
conviction, with dignity and with faith in what she was saying. I hoped that things
really were like that, that we truly were entering a new world, and that I would live
to see it.
She left the warehouse to as much acclaim as she had entered it, and when she saw
me in the crowd, she called me over and said that she'd missed me. She was happy
and confident, sure that she was doing the right thing.
This was the positive side of the newspaper article, and things might have ended
there. I wanted my analysis of events to be wrong, but three days later, my
prediction was confirmed. The negative side emerged in full force.
Employing the services of one of the most highly regarded and conservative law
practices in Britain, whose senior partners – unlike Athena – really did have
contacts in all spheres of government, and basing his case on published statements
made by Athena, the Rev. Buck called a news conference to say that he was suing
for defamation, calumny and moral damages.
The deputy editor called me in. He knew I was friendly with the central figure in
that scandal and suggested that we publish an exclusive interview. My first reaction
was of disgust: how could I use my friendship to sell newspapers?
However, after we had talked further, I started to think that it might be a good idea.
She would have the chance to put her side of the story; indeed, she could use the
interview to promote all the things for which she was now openly fighting. I left
the deputy editor's office with the plan we had drawn up together: a series of
articles on new trends in society and on radical changes that were taking place in
the search for religious belief. In one of those articles, I would publish Athena's
point of view.
That same afternoon, I went to her house, taking advantage of the fact that the
invitation had come from her when we met outside the warehouse. The
neighbours told me that, the day before, court officials had attempted to serve a
summons on her, but failed.
I phoned later on, without success. I tried again as night was falling, but no one
answered. From then on, I phoned every half an hour, growing more anxious with
each call. Ever since Hagia Sofia had cured my insomnia, tiredness drove me to
bed at eleven o'clock, but this time anxiety kept me awake.
I found her mother's number in the phone book, but it was late, and if Athena
wasn't there, then I would only cause the whole family to worry. What to do? I
turned on the TV to see if anything had happened – nothing special, London
continued as before, with its marvels and its perils.
I decided to try one last time. The phone rang three times, and someone answered.
I recognised Andrea's voice at once.
'What do you want?' she asked.
'Athena asked me to get in touch. Is everything all right?'
'Everything's all right and not all right, depending on your way of looking at things.
But I think you might be able to help.'
'Where is she?'
She hung up without saying any more.
Deidre O'Neill, known as Edda
Athena stayed in a hotel near my house. News from London regarding local
events, especially minor conflicts in the suburbs, never reaches Scotland. We're not
much interested in how the English sort out their little problems. We have our own
flag, our own football team, and soon we will have our own parliament.
I let Athena rest for a whole day. The following morning, instead of going into the
little temple and performing the rituals I know, I decided to take her and her son to
a wood near Edinburgh. There, while the boy played and ran about among the
trees, she told me in detail what was going on.
When she'd finished, I said:
'It's daylight, the sky is cloudy, and human beings believe that beyond the clouds
lives an allpowerful God, guiding the fate of men. Meanwhile, look at your son,
look at your feet, listen to the sounds around you: down here is the Mother, so
much closer, bringing joy to children and energy to those who walk over Her
body. Why do people prefer to believe in something far away and forget what is
there before their eyes, a true manifestation of the miracle?'
'I know the answer. Because up there someone is guiding us and giving his orders,
hidden behind the clouds, unquestionable in his wisdom. Down here, we have
physical contact with a magical reality, and the freedom to choose where our steps
will go.'
'Exactly. But do you think that is what people want? Do they want the freedom to
choose their own
steps?'
'Yes, I think they do. The earth I'm standing on now has laid out many strange
paths for me, from a village in Transylvania to a city in the Middle East, from there
to another city on an island, and then to the desert and back to Transylvania.
From a suburban bank to a real estate company in the Persian Gulf. From a dance
group to a bedouin. And whenever my feet drove me onwards, I said “Yes” instead
of saying “No”.' 'What did you gain from all that?'
'Today I can see people's auras. I can awaken the Mother in my soul. My life now
has meaning, and I know what I'm fighting for. But why do you ask? You, too,
gained the most important power of all – the gift of healing. Andrea can now
prophesy and converse with spirits. I've followed her spiritual development every
step of the way.'
'What else have you gained?'
'The joy of being alive. I know that I'm here, and that everything is a miracle, a
revelation.'
The little boy fell over and grazed his knee. Instinctively, Athena ran to him, wiped
the wound clean, told him not to worry, and the boy continued running about in
the forest. I used that as a signal.
'What just happened to your little boy, happened to me. And it's happening to you
too, isn't it?' 'Yes, but I don't think I stumbled and fell. I think I'm being tested
again, and that my next step will be revealed to me.'
At such moments, a teacher must say nothing, only bless the disciple. Because,
however much the teacher may want to save her disciple from suffering, the paths
are mapped out and the disciple's feet are eager to follow them. I suggested we go
back to the wood that night, just the two of us. She asked where she could leave
her son, and I said that I would take care of that. I had a neighbour who owed me
a favour and who would be delighted to look after Viorel.
As evening fell, we returned to that same place, and on the way, we spoke of
things that had nothing to do with the ritual we were about to perform. Athena had
seen me using a new kind of depilatory wax and was intrigued to know what
advantages it had over the old methods. We talked animatedly about vanity,
fashion, the cheapest places to buy clothes, female behaviour, feminism, hairstyles.
At one point she said something along the lines of: 'But if the soul is ageless, I
don't know why we should be so worried about all this', then realised that it was all
right just to relax and talk about superficial subjects. More than that, such
conversations were really fun, and how we look is something that's still very
important in women's lives (it is in men's lives too, but in a different way, and
they're not as open about it as we are).
As we approached the place I'd chosen – or, rather, which the wood was choosing
for me – I started to feel the presence of the Mother. In my case, this presence
manifests itself in a certain, mysterious inner joy that always touches me and almost
moves me to tears. It was the moment to stop and change the subject. 'Collect
some wood for kindling,' I said.
'But it's dark.'
'There's enough light from the full moon even if it's obscured by clouds. Train
your eyes: they were made to see more than you think.'
She began doing as I asked, occasionally cursing because she'd scratched herself
on a thorn. Almost half an hour passed, and during that time, we didn't talk. I felt
the excitement of knowing that the Mother was close by, the euphoria of being
there with that woman who still seemed little more than a child and who trusted me
and was keeping me company in that search which sometimes seemed too mad for
the human mind.
Athena was still at the stage of answering questions, just as she'd responded to
mine that afternoon. I had been like that once, until I allowed myself to be
transported completely into the kingdom of mystery, where it was simply a matter
of contemplating, celebrating, worshipping, praising and allowing the gift to
manifest itself.
I was watching Athena collecting firewood and I saw the girl I once was, in search
of veiled secrets and secret powers. Life had taught me something completely
different: the powers were not secret and the secrets had been revealed a long time
ago. When I saw that she had gathered enough firewood, I indicated that she
should stop.
I myself looked for some larger branches and put them on top of the kindling. So
it was in life. In order for the more substantial pieces of wood to catch fire, the
kindling must burn first. In order for us to liberate the energy of our strength, our
weakness must first have a chance to reveal itself.
In order for us to understand the powers we carry within us and the secrets that
have already been revealed, it was first necessary to allow the surface –
expectations, fears, appearances – to be burned away. We were entering the peace
now settling upon the forest, with the gentle wind, the moonlight behind the
clouds, the noises of the animals that sally forth at night to hunt, thus fulfilling the
cycle of birth and death of the Mother, and without ever being criticised for
following their instincts and their nature.
I lit the fire.
Neither of us felt like saying anything. For what seemed like an eternity, we merely
contemplated the dance of the fire, knowing that hundreds of thousands of
people, all over the world, would also be sitting by their fireside, regardless of
whether they had modern heating systems in their house or not; they did this
because they were sitting before a symbol.
It took a great effort to emerge from that trance, which, although it meant nothing
specific to me, and did not make me see gods, auras or ghosts, nonetheless left me
in the state of grace I needed to be in. I focused once more on the present, on the
young woman by my side, on the ritual I needed to perform.
'How is your student?' I asked.
'Difficult, but if she wasn't, I might not learn what I need to learn.' 'And what
powers is she developing?'
'She speaks with beings in the parallel world.' 'As you converse with Hagia Sofia?'
'No, as you well know, Hagia Sofia is the Mother manifesting herself in me. She
speaks with invisible beings.'
I knew this, but I wanted to be sure. Athena was more silent than usual. I don't
know if she had discussed the events in London with Andrea, but that didn't
matter. I got up, opened the bag I had with me, took out a handful of specially
chosen herbs and threw them into the flames.
'The wood has started to speak,' said Athena, as if this were something perfectly
normal, and that was good, it meant that miracles were now becoming part of her
life.
'What is it saying?'
'Nothing at the moment, only noises.'
Minutes later, she heard a song coming from the fire. 'Oh, it's wonderful!'
There spoke the little girl, not the wife or mother.
'Stay just as you are. Don't try to concentrate or follow my steps or understand
what I'm saying. Relax and feel good. That is sometimes all we can hope for from
life.'
I knelt down, picked up a red-hot piece of wood and drew a circle around her,
leaving a small opening through which I could enter. I could hear the same music
as Athena, and I danced around her, invoking the union of the male fire with the
earth, which received it now with arms and legs spread wide, the fire that purified
everything, transforming into energy the strength contained in the firewood, in
those branches, in those beings, both human and invisible. I danced for as long as
the melody from the fire lasted, and I made protective gestures to the child who
was sitting, smiling, inside the circle.
When the flames had burned down, I took a little ash and sprinkled it on Athena's
head. Then with my feet I erased the circle I'd drawn around her.
'Thank you,' she said. 'I felt very loved, wanted, protected.' 'In difficult moments,
remember that feeling.'
'Now that I've found my path, there will be no more difficult moments. After all, I
have a mission to fulfil, don't I?'
'Yes, we all have a mission to fulfil.' She started to feel uncertain.
'And what about the difficult moments?' she asked.
'That isn't an intelligent thing to ask. Remember what you said just now: you are
loved, wanted, protected.'
'I'll do my best.'
Her eyes filled with tears. Athena had understood my answer.
Samira R. Khalil, housewife
My own grandson! What has my grandson got to do with all this? What kind of
world are we living in? Are we still in the Middle Ages, engaging in witch-hunts?
away.
I ran to him. He had a bloody nose, but he didn't seem to care about my distress
and pushed me
'I know how to defend myself, and I did.'
I may never have produced a child in my own womb, but I know the hearts of
children. I was far more worried about Athena than I was about Viorel. This was
just one of many fights he would have to face in his life, and there was a flicker of
pride in his swollen eyes.
'Some children at school said that Mum was a devil-worshipper!'
Sherine arrived shortly afterwards, soon enough to see the boy's bloodied face and
to kick up a fuss. She wanted to go straight to the school and talk to the head
teacher, but first I put my arms around her. I let her cry out all her tears and all her
frustrations, and the best thing I could do then was to keep silent and try to
convey my love for her through that silence.
When she had calmed down a little, I explained carefully that she could come back
home and live with us, that we would take care of everything. When her father read
about the case being brought against her, he had immediately spoken to some
lawyers. We would do everything we could to get her out of this situation regardless
of comments from the neighbours, ironic looks from acquaintances, and the false
solidarity of friends.
Nothing in the world was more important than my daughter's happiness, even
though I'd never understood why she always had to choose the most difficult and
painful of paths. But a mother doesn't have to understand anything, she simply has
to love and protect. And feel proud. Knowing that we could give her almost
everything, she nevertheless set off early in search of her independence. She'd had
her stumbles and her failures, but she insisted on facing any storms alone. She
went looking for her mother, aware of the risks she was running, and in the end,
that encounter brought her closer to us. I knew she had never once heeded my
advice – get a degree, get married, put up with the problems of living with someone
without complaint, don't try to go beyond the limits set by society. And what had
been the result?
By following my daughter's story, I became a better person. Obviously I didn't
understand about the Mother Goddess or Athena's need always to surround herself
with strangers, or her inability to be contented with all that she'd achieved after so
much work. But deep down, even though it may be rather late in the day for such
ideas, I wish I could have been like her.
I was about to get up and prepare something to eat, but she stopped me.
'I want to stay here for a while with your arms around me. That's all I need. Viorel
go and watch TV. I want to talk to your grandmother.'
The boy obeyed.
'I must have caused you a lot of suffering.'
'Not at all. On the contrary, you and your son are the source of all our joy and our
reason for living.' 'But I haven't exactly–'
'I'm glad it's been the way it has. I can say it now: there were moments when I
hated you, when I bitterly regretted not having followed the advice of that nurse
and adopted another baby. Then I'd ask myself: “How can a mother hate her own
daughter?” I took tranquillizers, played bridge with my friends, went on shopping
sprees, and all to make up for the love I'd given you and which I felt I wasn't
getting back.
'A few months ago, when you decided to give up yet another job that was bringing
you both money and prestige, I was in despair. I went to the local church. I
wanted to make a promise to the Virgin and beg her to bring you back to reality, to
force you to change your life and make the most of the chances you were
throwing away. I was ready to do anything in exchange for that.
'I stood looking at the Virgin and Child. And I said: “You're a mother and you
know what's happening. Ask anything of me, but save my child, because I think
she's bent on self-destruction.”'
I felt Sherine's arms holding me tighter. She was crying again, but her tears were
different this time. I was doing my best to control my feelings.
'And do you know what I felt at that moment? I felt that she was talking to me and
saying: “Listen, Samira, that's what I thought too. I suffered for years because my
son wouldn't listen to anything I said. I used to worry about his safety, I didn't like
the friends he chose, and he showed no respect for laws, customs, religion, or his
elders.” Need I go on?'
'Yes, I'd like to hear the rest of the story.'
'The Virgin concluded by saying: “But my son didn't listen to me. And now I'm
very glad that he
didn't.”'
I gently removed myself from her embrace and got up. 'You two need to eat.'
I went to the kitchen, prepared some onion soup and a dish of tabbouleh, warmed
up some unleavened bread, put it all on the table, and we had lunch together. We
talked about trivial things, which, at such moments, always help to bring us
together and justify our pleasure at being there, quietly, even if, outside, a storm is
uprooting trees and sowing destruction. Of course, at the end of that afternoon,
my daughter and my grandson would walk out of the door to confront the winds,
the thunder and the lightning all over again, but that was their choice.
'Mum, you said that you'd do anything for me, didn't you?' It was true. I would lay
down my life if necessary.
'Don't you think I should be prepared to do anything for Viorel too?'
'I think that's a mother's instinct, but instinct aside, it's the greatest proof of love
there is.' She continued eating.
'You know that your father is happy to help with this case being brought against
you, if you want him to, that is.'
'Of course I do. This is my family we're talking about.'
I thought twice, three times, but couldn't hold back my words:
'Can I give you some advice? I know you have some influential friends, that
journalist, for example. Why don't you ask him to write about your story and tell
him your version of events? The press are giving a lot of coverage to that vicar,
and people will end up thinking he's right.'
'So, as well as accepting what I do, you also want to help me?'
'Yes, Sherine. Even though I may not understand you, even though I sometimes
suffer as the Virgin must have suffered all her life, even if you're not Jesus Christ
with an all-important message for the world, I'm on your side and I want to see
you win.'
Heron Ryan, journalist
Athena arrived while I was frantically making notes for what I imagined would be
the ideal interview on the events in Portobello and the rebirth of the Goddess. It
was a very, very delicate affair.
What I saw at the warehouse was a woman saying: 'You can do it, let the Great
Mother teach you trust in love and miracles will happen.' And the crowd agreed,
but that wouldn't last long, because we were living in an age in which slavery was
the only path to happiness. Free will demands immense responsibility; it's hard
work, it brings with it anguish and suffering.
'I need you to write something about me,' she said.
I told her that we should wait a little – after all, the whole affair could fade from
view the following week – but that, meanwhile, I'd prepared a few questions about
Female Energy.
'At the moment, all the fuss and the fighting is only of interest to people in the
immediate area and to the tabloids. No respectable newspaper has published a
single line about it. London is full of these little local disturbances, and getting into
the broadsheets really isn't advisable. It would be best if the group didn't meet for
two or three weeks. However, I think that the business about the Goddess, if
treated with the seriousness it deserves, could make a lot of people ask themselves
some really important questions.'
'Over supper that time, you said that you loved me. And now you're not only
telling me you don't want to help me, you're asking me to give up the things I
believe in.'
How to interpret those words? Was she finally accepting the love I'd offered her
that night, and which accompanied me every minute of my life? According to the
Lebanese poet Khalil Gibran, it was more important to give than to receive, but
while these were wise words, I was part of what is known as 'humanity', with my
frailties, my moments of indecision, my desire simply to live in peace, to be the
slave
of my feelings and to surrender myself without asking any questions, without even
knowing if my love was reciprocated. All she had to do was to let me love her; I
was sure that Hagia Sofia would agree with me. Athena had been passing through
my life now for nearly two years, and I was afraid she might simply continue on
her way and disappear over the horizon, without my having even been able to
accompany her on part of that journey.
'Are you talking about love?' 'I'm asking for your help.'
What to do? Control myself, stay cool, not precipitate things and end up destroying
them? Or take the step I needed to take, embrace her and protect her from all
dangers?
My head kept telling me to say: 'Don't you worry about a thing. I love you', but
instead I said: 'I want to help. Please trust me. I'd do anything in the world for you,
including saying “No” if I thought that was the right thing to do, even though you
might not understand my reasoning.'
I told her that the deputy editor on my newspaper had proposed a series of articles
about the reawakening of the Goddess, which would include an interview with her.
At first, it had seemed to me an excellent idea, but now I saw that it would be best
to wait a little. I said:
'You either carry your mission forward or you defend yourself. You're aware, I
know, that what you're doing is more important than how you're seen by other
people. Do you agree?'
'I'm thinking of my son. Every day now he gets into some fight or argument at
school.'
'That will pass. In a week, it'll be forgotten. That will be the moment to act, not in
order to defend yourself against idiotic attacks, but to set out, confidently and
wisely, the true breadth of your work. And if you have any doubts about my
feelings and are determined to continue, then I'll come with you to the next
meeting. And we'll see what happens.'
The following Monday I went with her to the meeting. I was not now just another
person in the crowd; I could see things as she was seeing them.
People crowded into the warehouse; there were flowers and applause, young
women calling her 'the priestess of the Goddess', a few smartly dressed ladies
begging for a private audience because of some illness in the family. The crowd
started pushing us and blocking the entrance. We had never imagined that we
might need some form of security, and I was frightened. I took her arm, picked up
Viorel, and we went in.
Inside the packed room, a very angry Andrea was waiting for us.
'I think you should tell them that you're not performing any miracles today!' she
shouted at Athena. 'You're allowing yourself to be seduced by vanity! Why doesn't
Hagia Sofia tell all these people to go away?'
'Because she can diagnose illnesses,' replied Athena defiantly. 'And the more
people who benefit from that, the better.'
She was about to say more, but the crowd was applauding and she stepped up
onto the improvised stage. She turned on the small sound system she'd brought
from home, gave instructions for people to dance against the rhythm of the music,
and the ritual began. At a certain point, Viorel went and sat down in a corner – that
was the moment for Hagia Sofia to appear. Athena did as I'd seen her do many
times before: she abruptly turned off the music, clutched her head in her hands,
and the people waited in silence as if obeying an invisible command.
The ritual followed its unvarying path: there were questions about love, which were
rejected, although she agreed to comment on anxieties, illnesses and other personal
problems. From where I was, I could see that some people had tears in their eyes,
others behaved as if they were standing before a saint. Then came the moment for
the closing sermon, before the group celebration of the Mother.
Since I knew what would happen next, I started thinking about the best way to get
out of there with the minimum of fuss. I hoped that she would take Andrea's
advice and tell them not to go looking for miracles there. I went over to where
Viorel was sitting, so that we could leave the place as soon as his mother had
finished speaking.
And that was when I heard the voice of Hagia Sofia.
'Today, before we close, we're going to talk about diet. Forget all about slimming
regimes.' Diet? Forget about slimming regimes?
'We have survived for all these millennia because we have been able to eat. And
now that seems to have become a curse. Why? What is it that makes us, at forty
years old, want to have the same body we had when we were young? Is it possible
to stop time? Of course not. And why should we be thin?'
I heard a kind of murmuring in the crowd. They were probably expecting a more
spiritual message. 'We don't need to be thin. We buy books, we go to gyms, we
expend a lot of brain power on trying to hold back time, when we should be
celebrating the miracle of being here in this world. Instead of thinking about how
to live better, we're obsessed with weight.
'Forget all about that. You can read all the books you want, do all the exercise you
want, punish yourself as much as you want, but you will still have only two choices
– either stop living or get fat.
'Eat in moderation, but take pleasure in eating: it isn't what enters a person's mouth
that's evil, but what leaves it. Remember that for millennia we have struggled in
order to keep from starving. Whose idea was it that we had to be thin all our lives?
I'll tell you: the vampires of the soul, those who are so afraid of the future that they
think it's possible to stop the wheel of time. Hagia Sofia can guarantee that it's not
possible. Use the energy and effort you put into dieting to nourish yourself with
spiritual bread. Know that the Great Mother gives generously and wisely. Respect
that and you will get no fatter than passing time demands. Instead of artificially
burning those calories, try to transform them into the energy required to fight for
your dreams. No one ever stayed slim for very long just because of a diet.'
There was complete silence. Athena began the closing ceremony, and we all
celebrated the presence of the Mother. I clasped Viorel in my arms, promising
myself that next time I would bring a few friends along to provide a little
improvised security. We left to the same shouts and applause as when we had
arrived.
A shopkeeper grabbed my arm:
'This is absurd! If one of my windows gets smashed, I'll sue you!'
Athena was laughing and giving autographs. Viorel seemed happy. I just hoped
that no journalist was there that night. When we finally managed to extricate
ourselves from the crowd, we hailed a taxi.
I asked if they would like to go somewhere to eat. 'Of course,' said Athena, 'that's
just what I've been talking about.'
Antoine Locadour, historian
In this long series of mistakes that came to be known as 'The Witch of Portobello
affair', what surprises me most is the ingenuousness of Heron Ryan, an
international journalist of many years' experience. When we spoke, he was
horrified by the tabloid headlines:
'The Goddess Diet!' screamed one.
'Get thin while you eat says Witch of Portobello!' roared another from its front
page.
As well as touching on the sensitive topic of religion, Athena had gone further: she
had talked about diet, a subject of national interest, more important even than
wars, strikes or natural disasters. We may not all believe in God, but we all want to
get thin.
Reporters interviewed local shopkeepers, who all swore blind that, in the days
preceding the mass meetings, they'd seen red and black candles being lit during
rituals involving only a handful of people. It
may have been nothing but cheap sensationalism, but Ryan should have foreseen
that, with a court case in progress, the accuser would take every opportunity to
bring to the judges' attention what he considered to be not only a calumny, but an
attack on all the values that kept society going.
That same week, one of the most prestigious British newspapers published in its
editorial column an article by the Rev. Ian Buck, Minister at the Evangelical
Church in Kensington. It said, amongst other things:
'As a good Christian, I have a duty to turn the other cheek when I am wrongly
attacked or when my honour is impugned. However, we must not forget that while
Jesus may have turned the other cheek, he also used a whip to drive out those
wanting to make the Lord's House into a den of thieves. That is what we are
seeing at the moment in Portobello Road: unscrupulous people who pass
themselves off as savers of souls, giving false hope and promising cures for all ills,
even declaring that you can stay thin and elegant if you follow their teachings.
'For this reason, I have no alternative but to go to the courts to prevent this
situation continuing. The movement's followers swear that they are capable of
awakening hitherto unknown gifts and they deny the existence of an All-Powerful
God, replacing him with pagan divinities such as Venus and Aphrodite. For them,
everything is permitted, as long as it is done with “love”. But what is love? An
immoral force which justifies any end? Or a commitment to society's true values,
such as the family and tradition?'
At the next meeting, foreseeing a repetition of the pitched battle of August, the
police brought in half a dozen officers to avoid any confrontations. Athena arrived
accompanied by a bodyguard improvised by Ryan, and this time there was not
only applause, there was booing and cursing too. One woman, seeing that Athena
was accompanied by a child of five, brought a charge two days later under the
Children Act 1989, alleging that the mother was inflicting irreversible damage on
her child and that custody should be given to the father.
One of the tabloids managed to track down Lukás Jessen-Petersen, who refused to
give an interview. He threatened the reporter, saying that if he so much as
mentioned Viorel in his articles, he wouldn't be responsible for his actions.
The following day, the tabloid carried the headline: 'Witch of Portobello's ex would
kill for son'. That same afternoon, two more charges under the Children Act 1989
were brought before the courts, calling for the child to be taken into care.
There was no meeting after that. Groups of people – for and against –gathered
outside the door, and uniformed officers were on hand to keep the peace, but
Athena did not appear. The same thing happened the following week, only this
time, there were fewer crowds and fewer police.
The third week, there was only the occasional bunch of flowers to be seen and
someone handing out photos of Athena to passers-by.
The subject disappeared from the front pages of the London dailies. And when
the Rev. Ian Buck announced his decision to withdraw all charges of defamation
and calumny, 'in the Christian spirit we should show to those who repent of their
actions', no major paper was interested in publishing his statement, which turned
up instead on the readers' pages of some local rag.
As far as I know, it never became national news, but was restricted to the pages
that dealt only with London news. I visited Brighton a month after the meetings
ended, and when I tried to bring the subject up with my friends there, none of
them had the faintest idea what I was talking about.
Ryan could have cleared up the whole business, and what his newspaper said
would have been picked up by the rest of the media. To my surprise, though, he
never published a line about Sherine Khalil.
In my view, the crime – given its nature – had nothing to do with what happened
in Portobello. It was all just a macabre coincidence.
Heron Ryan, journalist
Athena asked me to turn on the tape-recorder. She had brought another one with
her, of a type I'd never seen before – very sophisticated and very small.
'Firstly, I wish to state that I've been receiving death threats. Secondly, I want you
to promise that, even if I die, you will wait five years before you allow anyone else
to listen to this tape. In the future, people will be able to tell what is true and what
is false. Say you agree; that way you will be entering a legally binding agreement.'
'I agree, but I think–'
'Don't think anything. Should I be found dead, this will be my testament, on
condition that it won't be published now.'
I turned off the tape-recorder.
'You have nothing to fear. I have friends in government, people who owe me
favours, who need or will need me. We can–'
'Have I mentioned before that my boyfriend works for Scotland Yard?'
Not that again. If he really did exist, why wasn't he there when we needed him,
when both Athena and Viorel could have been attacked by the mob?
Questions crowded into my mind: Was she trying to test me? What was going
through that woman's mind? Was she unbalanced, fickle, one hour wanting to be
by my side, the next talking about this nonexistent man?
'Turn on the tape-recorder,' she said.
I felt terrible. I was beginning to think that she'd been using me all along. I would
like to have been able to say: 'Go away. Get out of my life. Ever since I first met
you, everything has been a hell. All I want is for you to come here, put your arms
around me and kiss me and say you want to stay with me forever, but that never
happens.'
'Is there anything wrong?'
She knew there was something wrong. Or, rather, she couldn't possibly not have
known what I was feeling, because I had never concealed my love for her, even
though I'd only spoken openly of it once. But I would cancel any appointment to
see her; I was always there when she needed me; I was trying to build some kind of
relationship with her son, in the belief that he would one day call me 'Dad'. I never
asked her to stop what she was doing; I accepted her way of life, her decisions; I
suffered in silence when she suffered; I was glad when she triumphed; I was proud
of her determination.
'Why did you turn off the tape-recorder?'
I hovered for a second between heaven and hell, between rebellion and
submission, between cold reason and destructive emotion. In the end, summoning
up all my strength, I managed to control myself. I pressed the button.
'Let's continue.'
'As I was saying, I've been receiving death threats. I've been getting anonymous
phone calls. They insult me and say I'm a menace, that I'm trying to restore the
reign of Satan, and that they can't allow this to happen.'
'Have you spoken to the police?'
I deliberately omitted any reference to her boyfriend, showing that I'd never
believed that story
anyway.
'Yes, I have. They've recorded the calls. They come from public phone boxes, but
the police told me not to worry, that they're watching my house. They've arrested
one person: he's mentally ill and believes he's the reincarnation of one of the
apostles, and that “this time, he must fight so that Christ is not driven out again”.
He's in a psychiatric hospital now. The police explained that he's been in hospital
before for making similar threats to other people.'
'If they're on the case, there's no need to worry. Our police are the best in the
world.'
'I'm not afraid of death. If I were to die today, I would carry with me moments that
few people my age have had the chance to experience. What I'm afraid of, and this
is why I've asked you to record our conversation today, is that I might kill
someone.'
'Kill someone?'
'You know that there are legal proceedings underway to remove Viorel from me.
I've asked friends, but no one can do anything. We just have to await the verdict.
According to them – depending on the judge, of course – these fanatics will get
what they want. That's why I've bought a gun. I know what it means for a
child to be removed from his mother, because I've experienced it myself. And so,
when the first bailiff arrives, I'll shoot, and I'll keep shooting until the bullets run
out. If they don't shoot me first, I'll use the knives in my house. If they take the
knives, I'll use my teeth and my nails. But no one is going to take Viorel from me,
or only over my dead body. Are you recording this?'
'I am. But there are ways–'
'There aren't. My father is following the case. He says that when it comes to family
law, there's little that can be done. Now turn off the tape-recorder.'
'Was that your testament?'
She didn't answer. When I did nothing, she took the initiative. She went over to
the sound system and put on that music from the steppes, which I now knew
almost by heart. She danced as she did during the rituals, completely out of rhythm,
and I knew what she was trying to do. Her tape-recorder was still on, a silent
witness to everything that was happening there. The afternoon sunlight was
pouring in through the windows, but Athena was off in search of another light,
one that had been there since the creation of the world.
When she felt the spark from the Mother she stopped dancing, turned off the
music, put her head in her hands and didn't move for some time. Then she raised
her head and looked at me.
'You know who is here, don't you?'
'Yes. Athena and her divine side, Hagia Sofia.'
'I've grown used to doing this. I don't think it's necessary, but it's the method I've
discovered for getting in touch with her, and now it's become a tradition in my life.
You know who you're talking to, don't you? To Athena. I am Hagia Sofia.'
'Yes, I know. The second time I danced at your house, I discovered that I had a
spirit guide too: Philemon. But I don't talk to him very much, I don't listen to what
he says. I only know that when he's present, it's as if our two souls have finally
met.'
'That's right. And today Philemon and Hagia Sofia are going to talk about love.'
'Should I dance first?'
'There's no need. Philemon will understand me, because I can see that you were
touched by my dance. The man before me suffers for something which he believes
he has never received – my love. But the man beyond your self understands that
all the pain, anxiety and feelings of abandonment are unnecessary and childish. I
love you. Not in the way that your human side wants, but in the way that the
divine spark wants. We inhabit the same tent, which was placed on our path by
Her. There we understand that we are not the slaves of our feelings, but their
masters. We serve and are served, we open the doors of our rooms and we
embrace. Perhaps we kiss too, because everything that happens very intensely on
Earth will have its counterpart on the invisible plane. And you know that I'm not
trying to provoke you, that I'm not toying with your feelings when I say that.'
'What is love, then?'
'The soul, blood and body of the Great Mother. I love you as exiled souls love
each other when they meet in the middle of the desert. There will never be
anything physical between us, but no passion is in vain, no love is ever wasted. If
the Mother awoke that love in your heart, she awoke it in mine too, although your
heart perhaps accepts it more readily. The energy of love can never be lost – it is
more powerful than anything and shows itself in many ways.'
'I'm not strong enough for this. Such abstractions only leave me feeling more
depressed and alone than ever.'
'I'm not strong enough either. I need someone by my side too. But one day, our
eyes will open, the different forms of Love will be made manifest, and then
suffering will disappear from the face of the Earth.
It won't be long now, I think. Many of us are returning from a long journey during
which we were forced to search for things that were of no interest to us. Now we
realise that they were false. But this return cannot be made without pain, because
we have been away for a long time and feel that we are strangers in our own land.
It will take some time to find the friends who also left, and the places where our
roots and our treasures lie. But this will happen.'
For some reason, what she said touched me. And that drove me on. 'I want to
continue talking about love,' I said.
'We are talking. That has always been the aim of everything I've looked for in my
life – allowing love to manifest itself in me without barriers, letting it fill up my
blank spaces, making me dance, smile,
justify my life, protect my son, get in touch with the heavens, with men and
women, with all those who were placed on my path. I tried to control my feelings,
saying such things as “he deserves my love” or “he doesn't”. Until, that is, I
understood my fate, when I saw that I might lose the most important thing in my
life.'
'Your son.'
'Exactly. He is the most complete manifestation of love. When the possibility arose
that he might be taken away from me, then I found myself and realised that I could
never have anything or lose anything. I understood this after crying for many
hours. It was only after intense suffering that the part of me I call Hagia Sofia said:
“What nonsense! Love always stays, even though, sooner or later, your son will
leave.”'
I was beginning to understand.
'Love is not a habit, a commitment, or a debt. It isn't what romantic songs tell us it
is – love simply is. That is the testament of Athena or Sherine or Hagia Sofia –
love is. No definitions. Love and don't ask too many questions. Just love.'
'That's difficult.' 'Are you recording?'
'You asked me to turn the machine off.' 'Well, turn it on again.'
I did as she asked. Athena went on:
'It's difficult for me too. That's why I'm not going back home. I'm going into
hiding. The police might protect me from madmen, but not from human justice. I
had a mission to fulfil and it took me so far that I even risked the custody of my
son. Not that I regret it. I fulfilled my destiny.'
'What was your mission?'
'You know what it was. You were there from the start. Preparing the way for the
Mother. Continuing a tradition that has been suppressed for centuries, but which is
now beginning to experience a resurgence.' 'Perhaps…'
I stopped, but she didn't say a word until I'd finished my sentence. '…perhaps you
came too early, and people aren't yet ready.' Athena laughed.
'Of course they're not. That's why there were all those confrontations, all that
aggression and obscurantism. Because the forces of darkness are dying, and they
are thrown back on such things as a last resort. They seem very strong, as animals
do before they die, but afterwards, they're too exhausted to get to their feet. I
sowed the seed in many hearts, and each one will reveal the Renaissance in its own
way, but one of those hearts will follow the full Tradition – Andrea.'
Andrea.
Who hated her, who blamed her for the collapse of our relationship, who said to
anyone who would listen that Athena had been taken over by egotism and vanity,
and had destroyed something that had been very hard to create.
Athena got to her feet and picked up her bag – Hagia Sofia was still with her. 'I can
see your aura. It's being healed of some needless suffering.'
'You know, of course, that Andrea doesn't like you.'
'Naturally. But we've been speaking for nearly half an hour about love. Liking has
nothing to do with it. Andrea is perfectly capable of fulfilling her mission. She has
more experience and more charisma than I do. She learned from my mistakes; she
knows that she must be prudent because in an age in which the wild beast of
obscurantism is dying, there's bound to be conflict. Andrea may hate me as a
person, and that may be why she's developed her gifts so quickly – to prove that
she was more able than me. When hatred makes a person grow, it's transformed
into one of the many ways of loving.'
She picked up her tape-recorder, put it in her bag and left.
At the end of that week, the court gave its verdict: various witnesses were heard,
and Sherine Khalil, known as Athena, was given the right to keep custody of her
child.
Moreover, the head teacher at the boy's school was officially warned that any kind
of discrimination against the boy would be punishable by law.
I knew there was no point in ringing the apartment where she used to live. She'd
left the key with Andrea, taken her sound system, some clothes, and said that she
would be gone for some time.
I waited for the telephone call to invite me to celebrate that victory together. With
each day that passed, my love for Athena ceased being a source of suffering and
became a lake ofjoy and serenity. I no longer felt so alone. At some point in space,
our souls – and the souls of all those returning exiles – were joyfully celebrating
their reunion.
The first week passed, and I assumed she was trying to recover from the recent
tensions. A month later, I assumed she must have gone back to Dubai and taken
up her old job; I telephoned and was told that they'd heard nothing more from
her, but if I knew where she was, could I please give her a message: the door was
always open, and she was greatly missed.
I decided to write a series of articles on the reawakening of the Mother, which
provoked a number of offensive letters accusing me of 'promoting paganism', but
which were otherwise a great success with our readership.
Two months later, when I was just about to have lunch, a colleague at work
phoned me. The body of Sherine Khalil, the Witch of Portobello, had been found
in Hampstead. She had been brutally murdered.
[text2]
Now that I've finished transcribing all the taped interviews, I'm going to give her
the transcript. She's probably gone for a walk in the Snowdonia National Park as
she does every afternoon. It's her birthday – or, rather, the date that her parents
chose for her birthday when they adopted her – and this is my present to her.
Viorel, who will be coming to the celebration with his grandparents, has also
prepared a surprise for her. He's recorded hisfirst composition in afriend's studio
and he's going to play it during supper.
She'll ask me afterwards: 'Why didyou do this?'
And I'll say: 'Because I needed to understandyou. ' During all the years we've been
together, I've only heard what I thought were legends about her, but now I know
that the legends are true.
Whenever I suggested going with her, be it to the Monday evening celebrations at
her apartment, to Romania, or to get-togethers with friends, she always asked me
not to. She wanted to be free, andpeople, she said, findpolicemen intimidating.
Faced by someone like me, even the innocentfeel guilty.
However, I went to the Portobello warehouse twice without her knowledge. Again
without her knowledge, I arrangedfor various colleagues to be around to protect
her when she arrived and left, and at least one person, later identified as a militant
member of some sect, was arrestedfor carrying a knife. He said he'd been told by
spirits to acquire a little bloodfrom the Witch ofPortobello, who was a
manifestation of the Great Mother. The blood, he said, was needed to consecrate
certain offerings. He didn't intend to kill her; he merely wanted a little blood on a
handkerchief. The investigation showed that there really was no intention to
murder, but nevertheless, he was charged and sentenced to six months in prison.
It wasn't my idea to make it look as if she'd been murdered. Athena wanted to
disappear and asked me if that would be possible. I explained that, if the courts
decided that the State should have custody of her child, I couldn't go against the
law, but when the judge found in herfavour, we were free to carry out her plan.
Athena wasfully aware that once the meetings at the warehouse became the focus
of local gossip, her mission would be ruinedfor good. There was no point standing
up in front of the crowd and denying that she was a queen, a witch, a divine
manifestation, because people choose to follow the powerful and they give power
to whomever they wish. And that would go against everything she preached
–freedom to choose, to consecrate your own bread, to awaken your particular gifts,
with no help from guides or shepherds.
Nor was there any point in disappearing. People would interpret such a gesture as
a retreat into the wilderness, an ascent into the heavens, a secret pilgrimage to meet
teachers in the Himalayas, and they would always be awaiting her return. Legends
andpossibly a cult could grow up around her. We started to notice this when she
stopped going to Portobello. My informants said that, contrary to everyone's
expectations, her cult was growing with frightening speed: other similar groups
were being created, people turned up claiming to be the 'heirs' ofHagia Sofia, the
newspaper photograph of her holding Viorel was being sold on the black market,
depicting her as a victim, a martyr to intolerance. Occultists started talking about an
'Order ofAthena', through which – upon payment – one could be put in touch
with the founder.
All that remained was 'death', but the death had to take place in completely normal
circumstances, like the death of any other person murdered in a big city. This
obliged us to take certain precautions:
(a) The crime could not in any way be associated with martyrdom for religious
reasons, because, if it was, we would only aggravate the very situation we were
trying to avoid.
(b) The victim would have to be so badly disfigured as to be unrecognisable.
(c) The murderer could not be arrested.
(d) We would need a corpse.
In a city like London, dead, disfigured, burned bodies turn up every day, but
normally we find the culprit. So we had to wait nearly two months until the
Hampstead murder. We found a murderer too, who was also conveniently dead –
he hadfled to Portugal and committed suicide by blowing his brains out. Justice had
been done, and all I needed was a little cooperation from my closestfriends. One
hand washes the other: they sometimes asked me to do things that were not
entirely orthodox, and as long as no major law was broken, there was – shall we
say – a certain degree offlexibility in interpreting the facts.
That is what happened. As soon as the body wasfound, I and a colleague of many
years' standing were given the case and, almost simultaneously, we got news that
the Portuguese police hadfound the body of a suicide in Guimarães, along with a
note confessing to a murder whose detailsfitted the case we were
dealing with, and giving instructionsfor all his money to be donated to charitable
institutions. It had been a crime ofpassion – love often ends like that.
In the note he left behind, the dead man said that he'd brought the woman from
one of the ex-Soviet republics and done everything he could to help her. He was
prepared to marry her so that she would have the same rights as a British citizen,
and then he'dfound a letter she was about to send to some German man, who had
invited her to spend afew days at his castle.
In the letter, she said she couldn't wait to leave and asked the German to send her
a plane ticket at once so that they could meet again as soon as possible. They had
met in a London café and had only exchanged two letters.
We had the perfect scenario.
Myfriend hesitated – no one likes to have an unsolved crime on theirfiles – but
when I said that I'd take the blame for this, he agreed.
I went to the place where Athena was in hiding – a delightful house in Oxford. I
used a syringe to take some of her blood. I cut off a lock of her hair and singed it
slightly. Back at the scene of the crime, I scattered this 'evidence' around. I knew
that since no one knew the identity of her real mother andfather, no DNA
identification would be possible, and so all I needed was to cross myfingers and
hope the murder didn't get too much coverage in the press.
A few journalists turned up. I told them the story of the murderer's suicide,
mentioning only the country, not the town. I said that no motive had been
foundfor the crime, but that we had completely discounted any idea that it was a
revenge killing or that there had been some religious motive. As I understood it
(after all, the police can make mistakes too), the victim had been raped. She
hadpresumably recognised her attacker, who had then killed and mutilated her.
If the German ever wrote again, his letters would have been sent back marked
'Return to sender'. Athena's photograph had appeared only once in the
newspapers, during the first demonstration in Portobello, and so the chances of
her being recognised were minimal. Apartfrom me, only three people know this
story – her parents and her son. They all attended the burial of 'her' remains and
the gravestone bears her name.
Her son goes to see her every weekend and is doing brilliantly at school.
Of course, Athena may one day tire of this isolated life and decide to return to
London. Nevertheless, people have very short memories, and apartfrom her
closestfriends, no one will remember her. By then, Andrea will be the catalyst and
– to be fair – she is better able than Athena to continue the mission. As well as
having all the necessary gifts, she's an actress and knows how deal with the public.
I understand that Andrea's work is spreading, although without attracting unwanted
attention. I hear about people in key positions in society who are in contact with
her and, when necessary, when the right critical mass is reached, they will put an
end to the hypocrisy of the Rev. Ian Bucks of this world.
And that's what Athena wants, notfame for herself, as many (including Andrea)
thought, but that the mission should be completed.
At the start of my investigations, ofwhich this transcript is the result, I thought I
was reconstructing her life so that she would see how brave and important she had
been. But as the conversations went on, I gradually discovered my own hidden
side, even though I don't much believe in these things. And I reached the
conclusion that the real reason behind all this work was a desire to answer a
question to which I'd never known the answer: why did Athena love me, when
we're so different and when we don't even share the same world view?
I remember when I kissed herfor the first time, in a bar near Victoria Station. She
was workingfor a bank at the time, and I was a detective at Scotland Yard. After
we'd been out together afew times, she invited me to go and dance at her landlord's
apartment, but I never did – it's not really my style.
And instead ofgetting annoyed, she said that she respected my decision. When I
re-read the statements made by herfriends, Ifeel really proud, because Athena
doesn't seem to have respected anyone else's decisions.
Months later, before she set off to Dubai, I told her that I loved her. She said that
she felt the same way, but added that we must be prepared to spend long periods
apart. Each of us would work in a different country, but true love could withstand
such a separation.
That was the only time I dared to ask her: 'Why do you love me?' She replied: 'I
don't know and I don't care. '
Now, as Iput the finishing touches to these pages, I believe I may have found the
answer in her last conversation with the journalist.
Love simply is.

When you set out on your journey to Ithaca,
pray that the road is long,
full of adventure, full of knowledge.
The Lestrygonians and the Cyclops,
the angry Poseidon—do not fear them:
You will never find such as these on your path
if your thoughts remain lofty, if a fine
emotion touches your spirit and your body.
The Lestrygonians and the Cyclops,
the fierce Poseidon you will never encounter,
if you do not carry them within your soul,
if your heart does not set them up before you.

Pray that the road is long.
That the summer mornings are many, when,
with such pleasure, with such joy
you will enter ports seen for the first time;
stop at Phoenician markets,
and purchase fine merchandise,
mother-of-pearl and coral, amber and ebony,
and sensual perfumes of all kinds,
as many sensual perfumes as you can;
visit many Egyptian cities,
to learn and learn from scholars.

Always keep Ithaca in your mind.
To arrive there is your ultimate goal.
But do not hurry the voyage at all.
It is better to let it last for many years;
and to anchor at the island when you are old,
rich with all you have gained on the way,
not expecting that Ithaca will offer you riches.

Ithaca has given you the beautiful voyage.
Without her you would never have set out on the road.
She has nothing more to give you.
And if you find her poor, Ithaca has not deceived you.
Wise as you have become, with so much experience,
you must already have understood what Ithacas mean.


Her name is Esther; she is a war correspondent who has just returned from Iraq
because of the imminent invasion of that country; she is thirty years old, married, without
children. He is an unidentified male, between twenty-three and twenty-five years old,
with dark, Mongolian features. The two were last seen in a café on the Rue du Faubourg
St-Honoré.
The police were told that they had met before, although no one knew how often: Esther
had always said that the man—who concealed his true identity behind the name
Mikhail—was someone very important, although she had never explained whether he
was important for her career as a journalist or for her as a woman.
The police began a formal investigation. Various theories were put forward—kidnapping,
blackmail, a kidnapping that had ended in murder—none of which were beyond the
bounds of possibility given that, in her search for information, her work brought her into
frequent contact with people who had links with terrorist cells. They discovered that, in
the weeks prior to her disappearance, regular sums of money had been withdrawn from
her bank account: those in charge of the investigation felt that these could have been
payments made for information. She had taken no change of clothes with her, but, oddly
enough, her passport was nowhere to be found.
He is a stranger, very young, with no police record, with no clue as to his identity.
She is Esther, thirty years old, the winner of two international prizes for journalism, and
married.
My wife.

I immediately come under suspicion and am detained because I refuse to say where I
was on the day she disappeared. However, a prison officer has just opened the door of my
cell, saying that I’m a free man.
And why am I a free man? Because nowadays, everyone knows everything about
everyone; you just have to ask and the information is there: where you’ve used your
credit card, where you spend your time, whom you’ve slept with. In my case, it was even
easier: a woman, another journalist, a friend of my wife, and divorced—which is why she
doesn’t mind revealing that she slept with me—came forward as a witness in my favor
when she heard that I had been detained. She provided concrete proof that I was with her
on the day and the night of Esther’s disappearance.
I talk to the chief inspector, who returns my belongings and offers his apologies, adding
that my rapid detention was entirely within the law, and that I have no grounds on which
to accuse or sue the state. I say that I haven’t the slightest intention of doing either of
those things, that I am perfectly aware that we are all under constant suspicion and under
twenty-four-hour surveillance, even when we have committed no crime.
“You’re free to go,” he says, echoing the words of the prison officer.
I ask: Isn’t it possible that something really has happened to my wife? She had said to me
once that—understandably given her vast network of contacts in the terrorist
underworld—she occasionally got the feeling she was being followed.
The inspector changes the subject. I insist, but he says nothing.
I ask if she would be able to travel on her passport, and he says, of course, since she has
committed no crime. Why shouldn’t she leave and enter the country freely?
“So she may no longer be in France?”
“Do you think she left you because of that woman you’ve been sleeping with?”
That’s none of your business, I reply. The inspector pauses for a second and grows
serious; he says that I was arrested as part of routine procedure, but that he is nevertheless
very sorry about my wife’s disappearance. He is married himself and although he doesn’t
like my books (So he isn’t as ignorant as he looks! He knows who I am!), he can put
himself in my shoes and imagine what I must be going through.
I ask him what I should do next. He gives me his card and asks me to get in touch if I
hear anything. I’ve watched this scene in dozens of films, and I’m not convinced;
inspectors always know more than they say they do.
He asks me if I have ever met the person who was with Esther the last time she was seen
alive. I say that I knew his code name, but didn’t know him personally.
He asks if we have any domestic problems. I say that we’ve been together for ten years
and have the same problems most married couples have—nothing more.
He asks, delicately, if we have discussed divorce recently, or if my wife was considering
leaving me. I tell him we have never even considered the possibility, and say again that
“like all couples” we have our occasional disagreements.
Frequent or only occasional?
Occasional, I say.
He asks still more delicately if she suspected that I was having an affair with her friend. I
tell him that it was the first—and last—time that her friend and I had slept together. It
wasn’t an affair; it came about simply because we had nothing else to do. It had been a
bit of a dull day, neither of us had any pressing engagements after lunch, and the game of
seduction always adds a little zest to life, which is why we ended up in bed together.
“You go to bed with someone just because it’s a bit of a dull day?”
I consider telling him that such matters hardly form part of his investigations, but I need
his help, or might need it later on. There is, after all, that invisible institution called the
Favor Bank, which I have always found so very useful.
“Sometimes, yes. There’s nothing else very interesting to do, the woman is looking for
excitement, I’m looking for adventure, and that’s that. The next day, you both pretend
that nothing happened, and life goes on.”
He thanks me, holds out his hand and says that in his world, things aren’t quite like that.
Naturally, boredom and tedium exist, as does the desire to go to bed with someone, but
everything is much more controlled, and no one ever acts on their thoughts or desires.
“Perhaps artists have more freedom,” he remarks.
I say that I’m familiar with his world, but have no wish to enter into a comparison
between our different views of society and people. I remain silent, awaiting his next
move.
“Speaking of freedom,” he says, slightly disappointed at this writer’s refusal to enter into
a debate with a police officer, “you’re free to go. Now that I’ve met you, I’ll read your
books. I know I said I didn’t like them, but the fact is I’ve never actually read one.”
This is not the first or the last time that I will hear these words. At least this whole
episode has gained me another reader. I shake his hand and leave.

I’m free. I’m out of prison, my wife has disappeared under mysterious circumstances, I
have no fixed timetable for work, I have no problem meeting new people, I’m rich,
famous, and if Esther really has left me, I’ll soon find someone to replace her. I’m free,
independent.
But what is freedom?
I’ve spent a large part of my life enslaved to one thing or another, so I should know the
meaning of the word. Ever since I was a child, I have fought to make freedom my most
precious commodity. I fought with my parents, who wanted me to be an engineer, not a
writer. I fought with the other boys at school, who immediately homed in on me as the
butt of their cruel jokes, and only after much blood had flowed from my nose and from
theirs, only after many afternoons when I had to hide my scars from my mother—because
it was up to me, not her, to solve my problems—did I manage to show them that I could
take a thrashing without bursting into tears. I fought to get a job to support myself, and
went to work as a delivery man for a hardware store, so as to be free from that old line in
family blackmail: “We’ll give you money, but you’ll have to do this, this, and this.”
I fought—although without success—for the girl I was in love with when I was an
adolescent, and who loved me too; she left me in the end because her parents convinced
her that I had no future.
I fought against the hostile world of journalism—my next job—where my first boss kept
me hanging around for three whole hours and only deigned to take any notice of me when
I started tearing up the book he was reading: he looked at me in surprise and saw that
here was someone capable of persevering and confronting the enemy, essential qualities
for a good reporter. I fought for the socialist ideal, went to prison, came out and went on
fighting, feeling like a working-class hero—until, that is, I heard the Beatles and decided
that rock music was much more fun than Marx. I fought for the love of my first, second,
and third wives. I fought to find the courage to leave my first, second, and third wives,
because the love I felt for them hadn’t lasted, and I needed to move on, until I found the
person who had been put in this world to find me—and she was none of those three.
I fought for the courage to leave my job on the newspaper and launch myself into the
adventure of writing a book, knowing full well that no one in my country could make a
living as a writer. I gave up after a year, after writing more than a thousand pages—pages
of such genius that even I couldn’t understand them.
While I was fighting, I heard other people speaking in the name of freedom, and the more
they defended this unique right, the more enslaved they seemed to be to their parents’
wishes, to a marriage in which they had promised to stay with the other person “for the
rest of their lives,” to the bathroom scales, to their diet, to half-finished projects, to lovers
to whom they were incapable of saying “No” or “It’s over,” to weekends when they were
obliged to have lunch with people they didn’t even like. Slaves to luxury, to the
appearance of luxury, to the appearance of the appearance of luxury. Slaves to a life they
had not chosen, but which they had decided to live because someone had managed to
convince them that it was all for the best. And so their identical days and nights passed,
days and nights in which adventure was just a word in a book or an image on the
television that was always on, and whenever a door opened, they would say:
“I’m not interested. I’m not in the mood.”
How could they possibly know if they were in the mood or not if they had never tried?
But there was no point in asking; the truth was they were afraid of any change that would
upset the world they had grown used to.
The inspector says I’m free. I’m free now and I was free in prison too, because freedom
continues to be the thing I prize most in the world. Of course, this has led me to drink
wines I did not like, to do things I should not have done and which I will not do again; it
has left scars on my body and on my soul, it has meant hurting certain people, although I
have since asked their forgiveness, when I realized that I could do absolutely anything
except force another person to follow me in my madness, in my lust for life. I don’t regret
the painful times; I bear my scars as if they were medals. I know that freedom has a high
price, as high as that of slavery; the only difference is that you pay with pleasure and a
smile, even when that smile is dimmed by tears.

I leave the police station, and it’s a beautiful day outside, a sunny Sunday that does not
reflect my state of mind at all. My lawyer is waiting for me with a few consoling words
and a bunch of flowers. He says that he’s phoned around to all the hospitals and morgues
(the kind of thing you do when someone fails to return home), but has not as yet found
Esther. He says that he managed to prevent journalists from finding out where I was
being held. He says he needs to talk to me in order to draw up a legal strategy that will
help me defend myself against any future accusation. I thank him for all his trouble; I
know he’s not really interested in drawing up a legal strategy, he just doesn’t want to
leave me alone, because he’s not sure how I’ll react. (Will I get drunk and be arrested
again? Will I cause a scandal? Will I try to kill myself?) I tell him I have some important
business to sort out and that we both know perfectly well that I have no problem with the
law. He insists, but I give him no choice—after all, I’m a free man.
Freedom. The freedom to be wretchedly alone.
I take a taxi to the center of Paris and ask to be dropped near the Arc de Triomphe. I set
off down the Champs-Elysées toward the Hôtel Bristol, where Esther and I always used
to meet for hot chocolate whenever one of us came back from some trip abroad. It was
our coming-home ritual, a plunge back into the love that bound us together, even though
life kept sending us off along ever more diverging paths.
I keep walking. People smile, children are pleased to have been given these few hours of
spring in the middle of winter, the traffic flows freely, everything seems to be in order—
except that none of them know that I have just lost my wife; they don’t even pretend not
to know, they don’t even care. Don’t they realize the pain I’m in? They should all be
feeling sad, sympathetic, supportive of a man whose soul is losing love as if it were
losing blood; but they continue laughing, immersed in their miserable little lives that only
happen on weekends.
What a ridiculous thought! Many of the people I pass must also have their souls in tatters,
and I have no idea how or why they are suffering.
I go into a bar and buy some cigarettes; the person answers me in English. I go into a
chemist’s to buy a mint I particularly like, and the assistant speaks to me in English (both
times I asked for the products in French). Before I reach the hotel, I am stopped by two
boys just arrived from Toulouse who are looking for a particular shop; they have asked
several other people, but no one understands what they say. What’s going on? Have they
changed languages on the Champs-Elysées in the twenty-four hours since I was arrested?
Tourism and money can perform miracles, but how come I haven’t noticed this before? It
has obviously been a long time since Esther and I met here to drink hot chocolate, even
though we have each been away and come back several times during that period. There is
always something more important. There is always some unpostponable appointment.
Yes, my love, we’ll have that hot chocolate next time, come back soon; I’ve got a really
important interview today and won’t be able to pick you up at the airport, take a taxi; my
cell phone’s on, call me if there’s anything urgent; otherwise, I’ll see you tonight.
My cell phone! I take it out of my pocket and immediately turn it on; it rings several
times, and each time my heart turns over. On the tiny screen I see the names of the people
who have been trying to get in touch with me, but reply to none of them. I hope for
someone “unidentified” to appear, because that would be she, since only about twenty
people know my number and have sworn not to pass it on. It doesn’t appear, only the
numbers of friends or trusted colleagues. They must be eager to know what happened,
they want to help (but how?), to ask if I need anything.
The telephone keeps ringing. Should I answer it? Should I arrange to meet up with some
of these people?
I decide to remain alone until I’ve managed to work out what is going on.
I reach the Hôtel Bristol, which Esther always described as one of the few hotels in Paris
where customers are treated like guests rather than homeless people in search of shelter. I
am greeted as if I were a friend of the family; I choose a table next to an exquisite clock; I
listen to the piano and look out at the garden.
I need to be practical, to study the options; after all, life goes on. I am not the first nor
will I be the last man whose wife has left him, but did it have to happen on a sunny day,
with everyone in the street smiling and children singing, with the first signs of spring just
beginning to show, the sun shining, and drivers stopping at pedestrian crossings?
I pick up a napkin. I’m going to get these ideas out of my head and put them down on
paper. Let’s leave sentiment to one side and see what I should do:
(a) Consider the possibility that she really has been kidnapped and that her life is in
danger at this very moment, and that I, as her husband and constant companion, must
therefore move heaven and earth to find her.
Response to this possibility: she took her passport with her. The police don’t know this,
but she also took several other personal items with her, among them a wallet containing
images of various patron saints which she always carries with her whenever she goes
abroad. She also withdrew money from her bank.
Conclusion: she was clearly preparing to leave.
(b) Consider the possibility that she believed a promise someone gave her and it turned
out to be a trap.
Response: she had often put herself in dangerous situations before; it was part of her job,
but she always warned me when she did so, because I was the only person she could trust
completely. She would tell me where she was going to be, who she was going to see
(although, so as not to put me at risk, she usually used the person’s nom de guerre), and
what I should do if she did not return by a certain time.
Conclusion: she was not planning a meeting with one of her informants.
(c) Consider the possibility that she has met another man.
Response: there is no response. Of all the hypotheses, this is the only one that makes any
sense. And yet I can’t accept it, I can’t accept that she would leave like that, without
giving me a reason. Both Esther and I have always prided ourselves on confronting all
life’s difficulties together. We suffered, but we never lied to each other, although it was
part of the rules of the game not to mention any extramarital affairs. I was aware that she
had changed a lot since meeting this fellow Mikhail, but did that justify ending a
marriage that has lasted ten years?
Even if she had slept with him and fallen in love, wouldn’t she weigh in the balance all
the time that we had spent together and everything we had conquered before setting off
on an adventure from which there was no turning back? She was free to travel whenever
she wanted to, she lived surrounded by men, soldiers who hadn’t seen a woman in ages,
but I never asked any questions, and she never told me anything. We were both free, and
we were proud of that.
But Esther had disappeared and left clues that were visible only to me, as if it were a
secret message: I’m leaving.
Why?
Is that question worth answering?
No. Because hidden in the answer is my own inability to keep the woman I love by my
side. Is it worth finding her and persuading her to come back? Begging and imploring her
to give our marriage another chance?
That seems ridiculous: it would be better merely to suffer as I had in the past, when other
people I loved had left me. It would be better just to lick my wounds, as I had also done
in the past. For a while, I’ll think obsessively about her, I’ll become embittered, I’ll bore
my friends because all I ever talk about is my wife leaving me. I’ll try to justify what
happened, spend days and nights reviewing every moment spent by her side, I’ll conclude
that she was too hard on me, even though I always tried to do my best. I’ll find other
women. When I walk down the street, I’ll keep seeing women who could be her. I’ll
suffer day and night, night and day. This could take weeks, months, possibly a year or
more.
Until one morning, I’ll wake up and find I’m thinking about something else, and then I’ll
know the worst is over. My heart might be bruised, but it will recover and become
capable of seeing the beauty of life once more. It’s happened before, it will happen again,
I’m sure. When someone leaves, it’s because someone else is about to arrive—I’ll find
love again.
For a moment, I savor the idea of my new state: single and a millionaire. I can go out in
broad daylight with whomever I want. I can behave at parties in a way I haven’t behaved
in years. The news will travel fast, and soon all kinds of women, the young and the not so
young, the rich and the not as rich as they would like to be, the intelligent and those
trained to say only what they think I would like to hear, will all come knocking at my
door.
I want to believe that it is wonderful to be free. Free again. Ready to find my one true
love, who is waiting for me and who will never allow me to experience such humiliation
again.

I finish my hot chocolate and look at the clock; I know it is still too soon for me to be
able to enjoy the agreeable feeling that I am once more part of humanity. For a few
moments, I imagine that Esther is about to come in through that door, walk across the
beautiful Persian carpets, sit down beside me and say nothing, just smoke a cigarette,
look out at the courtyard garden and hold my hand. Half an hour passes, and for half an
hour I believe in the story I have just created, until I realize that it is pure fantasy.
I decide not to go home. I go over to reception, ask for a room, a toothbrush, and some
deodorant. The hotel is full, but the manager fixes things for me: I end up with a lovely
suite looking out at the Eiffel Tower, a terrace, the rooftops of Paris, the lights coming on
one by one, the families getting together to have Sunday supper. And the feeling I had in
the Champs-Elysées returns: the more beautiful everything is around me, the more
wretched I feel.
No television. No supper. I sit on the terrace and look back over my life, a young man
who dreamed of becoming a famous writer, and who suddenly saw that the reality was
completely different—he writes in a language almost no one reads, in a country which is
said to have almost no reading public. His family forces him to go to university (any
university will do, my boy, just as long as you get a degree; otherwise you’ll never be
anyone). He rebels, travels the world during the hippie era, meets a singer, writes a few
song lyrics, and is suddenly earning more money than his sister, who listened to what her
parents said and decided to become a chemical engineer….
I write more songs, the singer goes from strength to strength; I buy a few apartments and
fall out with the singer, but still have enough capital not to have to work for the next few
years. I get married for the first time, to an older woman, I learn a lot—how to make love,
how to drive, how to speak English, how to lie in bed until late—but we split up because
she considers me to be “emotionally immature, and too ready to chase after any girl with
big enough breasts.” I get married for a second and a third time to women I think will
give me emotional stability: I get what I want, but discover that the stability I wanted is
inseparable from a deep sense of tedium.
Two more divorces. Free again, but it’s just a feeling; freedom is not the absence of
commitments, but the ability to choose—and commit myself to—what is best for me.
I continue my search for love, I continue writing songs. When people ask me what I do, I
say I’m a writer. When they say they only know my song lyrics, I say that’s just part of
my work. When they apologize and say they’ve never read any of my books, I explain
that I’m working on a project—which is a lie. The truth is that I have money, I have
contacts, but what I don’t have is the courage to write a book. My dream is now
realizable, but if I try and fail, I don’t know what the rest of my life will be like; that’s
why it’s better to live cherishing a dream than face the possibility that it might all come
to nothing.
One day, a journalist comes to interview me. She wants to know what it’s like to have my
work known all over the country but to be entirely unknown myself, since normally it’s
only the singer who appears in the media. She’s pretty, intelligent, quiet. We meet again
at a party, where there’s no pressure of work, and I manage to get her into bed that same
night. I fall in love, but she’s not remotely interested. When I phone, she always says
she’s busy. The more she rejects me, the more interested I become, until, at last, I manage
to persuade her to spend a weekend at my house in the country. (I may have been the
black sheep of the family, but sometimes rebellion pays off: I was the only one of my
friends at that stage in our lives to have bought a house in the country.)
We spend three days alone, contemplating the sea. I cook for her, and she tells me stories
about her work and ends up falling in love with me. We come back to the city, she starts
sleeping at my apartment on a regular basis. One morning, she leaves earlier than usual
and returns with her typewriter; from then on, without anything being said, my home
becomes her home too.
The same conflicts I had with my previous wives begin to surface: women are always
looking for stability and fidelity, while I’m looking for adventure and the unknown. This
time, though, the relationship lasts longer. Nevertheless, two years on, I decide it’s time
for Esther to take her typewriter back to her own apartment, along with everything else
she brought with her.
“It’s not going to work.”
“But you love me and I love you, isn’t that right?”
“I don’t know. If you’re asking me if I like your company, the answer is yes. If, on the
other hand, you’re asking me if I could live without you, the answer is also yes.”
“I’m glad I wasn’t born a man. I’m very content with my female condition. All you
expect of us women is that we can cook well. Men, on the other hand, are expected to be
able to do everything—they’ve got to be able to keep a home afloat, make love, take care
of the children, bring in the money, and be successful.”
“That’s not it either: I’m very happy with myself. I enjoy your company, but I just don’t
think it’s going to work.”
“You enjoy my company, but hate being by yourself. You’re always looking for
adventure in order to forget more important things. You always want to feel the
adrenaline flowing in your veins and you forget that the only thing that should be flowing
through them is blood.”
“I’m not running away from important things. Give me an example of something
important.”
“Writing a book.”
“I can do that any time.”
“Go on then, do it. Then, if you like, we can go our separate ways.”

I find her comment absurd; I can write a book whenever I want to; I know publishers,
journalists, all of whom owe me favors. Esther is just a woman who’s afraid of losing me,
she’s inventing things. I tell her it’s over, our relationship is at an end, it isn’t a matter of
what she thinks would make me happy, it’s about love.
What is love? she asks. I spend half an hour explaining and realize that I can’t come up
with a good definition.
She says that, since I don’t know how to define love, I should try and write a book.
I say that the two things are completely unrelated. I’m going to leave the apartment that
very day; she can stay there for as long as she likes. I’ll go and stay in a hotel until she
has found somewhere else to live. She says that’s fine by her, I can leave now, the
apartment will be free within the month—she’ll start looking for a new place tomorrow. I
pack my bags, and she goes and reads a book. I say it’s getting late, I’ll leave tomorrow.
She says I should leave at once because, tomorrow, I won’t feel as strong or as
determined. I ask her if she’s trying to get rid of me. She laughs and says I was the one
who wanted to end the relationship. We go to bed, and the following day, the desire to
leave is not as urgent, and I decide I need to think things through. Esther, however, says
the matter isn’t over yet: this scenario will simply keep recurring as long as I refuse to
risk everything for what I believe to be my real reason for living; in the end, she’ll
become unhappy and will leave me. Except that, if she left, she would do so immediately
and burn any bridges that would allow her to come back. I ask her what she means. She’d
get another boyfriend, she says, fall in love.
She goes off to her work at the newspaper, and I decide to take a day’s leave (apart from
writing lyrics, I’m also working for a recording company). I sit down at the typewriter. I
get up again, read the papers, reply to some urgent letters, and, when I’ve done that, start
replying to nonurgent letters. I make a list of things I need to do, I listen to music, I take a
walk around the block, chat to the baker, come home, and suddenly the whole day has
gone and I still haven’t managed to type a single sentence. I decide that I hate Esther, that
she’s forcing me to do things I don’t want to do.
When she gets home, she doesn’t ask me anything, but I admit that I haven’t managed to
do any writing. She says that I have the same look in my eye as I did yesterday.
The following day I go to work, but that evening I again go over to the desk on which the
typewriter is sitting. I read, watch television, listen to music, go back to the machine, and
so two months pass, with me accumulating pages and more pages of “first sentences,” but
never managing to finish a paragraph.
I come up with every possible excuse—no one reads in this country; I haven’t worked out
a plot; I’ve got a fantastic plot, but I’m still looking for the right way to develop it.
Besides, I’m really busy writing an article or a song lyric. Another two months pass, and
one day, she comes home bearing a plane ticket.
“Enough,” she says. “Stop pretending that you’re busy, that you’re weighed down by
responsibilities, that the world needs you to do what you’re doing, and just go traveling
for a while.” I can always become the editor of the newspaper where I publish a few
articles, I can always become the president of the recording company for which I write
lyrics, and where I work simply because they don’t want me to write lyrics for their
competitors. I can always come back to do what I’m doing now, but my dream can’t wait.
Either I accept it or I forget it.
Where is the ticket for?
Spain.
I’m shocked. Air tickets are expensive; besides, I can’t go away now, I’ve got a career
ahead of me, and I need to look after it. I’ll lose out on a lot of potential music
partnerships; the problem isn’t me, it’s our marriage. If I really wanted to write a book,
no one would be able to stop me.
“You can, you want to, but you don’t,” she says. “Your problem isn’t me, but you, so it
would be best if you spent some time alone.”
She shows me a map. I must go to Madrid, where I’ll catch a bus up to the Pyrenees, on
the border with France. That’s where a medieval pilgrimage route begins: the road to
Santiago. I have to walk the whole way. She’ll be waiting for me at the other end and
then she’ll accept anything I say: that I don’t love her anymore, that I still haven’t lived
enough to create a literary work, that I don’t even want to think about being a writer, that
it was nothing but an adolescent dream.
This is madness! The woman I’ve been living with for two long years—a real eternity in
relationship terms—is making decisions about my life, forcing me to give up my work
and expecting me to walk across an entire country! It’s so crazy that I decide to take it
seriously. I get drunk several nights running, with her beside me getting equally drunk—
even though she hates drinking. I get aggressive; I say she’s jealous of my independence,
that the only reason this whole mad idea was born is because I said I wanted to leave her.
She says that it all started when I was still at school and dreaming of becoming a writer—
no more putting things off; if I don’t confront myself now, I’ll spend the rest of my life
getting married and divorced, telling cute anecdotes about my past and going steadily
downhill.
Obviously, I can’t admit she’s right, but I know she’s telling the truth. And the more
aware I am of this, the more aggressive I become. She accepts my aggression without
complaint; she merely reminds me that the departure date is getting closer.
One night, shortly before that date, she refuses to make love. I smoke a whole joint of
marijuana, drink two bottles of wine, and pass out in the middle of the living room. When
I come to, I realize that I have reached the bottom of the pit, and now all that remains is
for me to clamber back up to the top. And I, who so pride myself on my courage, see how
cowardly, mean, and unadventurous I am being with my own life. That morning, I wake
her with a kiss and tell her that I’ll do as she suggests.
I set off, and for thirty-eight days I follow the road to Santiago. When I arrive, I
understand that my real journey only starts there. I decide to settle in Madrid and live off
my royalties, to allow an ocean to separate me from Esther’s body, even though we are
still officially together and often talk on the phone. It’s very comfortable being married
and knowing that I can always return to her arms, meanwhile enjoying all the
independence in the world.
I fall in love with a Catalan scientist, with an Argentine woman who makes jewelry, and
with a young woman who sings in the metro. The royalties from my lyrics keep rolling in
and are enough for me to live comfortably without having to work and with plenty of
time to do everything—even write a book.
The book can always wait until tomorrow, though, because the mayor of Madrid has
decreed that the city should be one long party and has come up with an interesting
slogan—“Madrid is killing me”—and urges us all to visit several bars each night, coining
the phrase la movida madrileña (“the Madrid scene”), which is something I cannot
possibly put off until tomorrow; everything is such fun; the days are short and the nights
are long.
One day, Esther phones to say that she’s coming to see me: according to her, we need to
sort out our situation once and for all. She has booked her ticket for the following week,
which gives me just enough time to organize a series of excuses. (“I’m going to Portugal,
but I’ll be back in a month,” I tell the blonde girl who used to sing in the metro and who
now sleeps in the rented apartment where I live and with whom I go out every night to
enjoy la movida madrileña.) I tidy the apartment, expunge any trace of a female
presence, and ask my friends not to breathe a word, because my wife is coming to stay
for a month.
Esther gets off the plane sporting a hideous, unrecognizable haircut. We travel to the
interior of Spain, discover little towns that mean a great deal for one night, but which, if I
went back there today, I wouldn’t even be able to find. We go to bullfights, flamenco
shows, and I am the best husband in the world, because I want her to go home feeling that
I still love her. I don’t know why I want to give this impression—perhaps because, deep
down, I know that the Madrid dream will eventually end.
I complain about her haircut and she changes it and is pretty again. There are only ten
days left of her holiday and I want her to go home feeling happy and to leave me alone to
enjoy this Madrid that is killing me, the discotheques that open at ten in the morning, the
bullfights, the endless conversations about the same old topics, the alcohol, the women,
more bullfights, more alcohol, more women, and absolutely no timetable.
One Sunday, while we are walking to a bar that serves food all night, she brings up the
forbidden topic: the book I said I was writing. I drink a whole bottle of sherry, kick any
metal doors we pass on the way back, verbally abuse other people in the street, ask why
she bothered traveling all this way if her one aim was to make my life a hell and destroy
my happiness. She says nothing, but we both know that our relationship has reached its
limits. I have a dreamless night’s sleep, and the following morning, having complained to
the building manager about the phone that doesn’t work, having told off the cleaning
woman because she hasn’t changed the sheets for a week, having taken a long, long bath
to get rid of the hangover from the night before, I sit down at my typewriter, just to show
Esther that I am trying, honestly trying, to work.
And suddenly, the miracle happens. I look across at the woman who has just made some
coffee and is now reading the newspaper, whose eyes look tired and desperate, who is her
usual silent self, who does not always show her affection in gestures, the woman who
made me say yes when I wanted to say no, who forced me to fight for what she, quite
rightly, believed was my reason for living, who let me set off alone because her love for
me was greater even than her love for herself, who made me go in search of my dream;
and, suddenly, seeing that small, quiet woman, whose eyes said more than any words,
who was often terrified inside, but always courageous in her actions, who could love
someone without humbling herself and who never ever apologized for fighting for her
man—suddenly, my fingers press down on the keys.
The first sentence emerges. Then the second.
I spend two days without eating, I sleep the bare minimum, the words seem to spring
from some unknown place, as they did when I used to write lyrics, in the days when, after
much arguing and much meaningless conversation, my musical partner and I would know
that “it” was there, ready, and it was time to set “it” down in words and notes. This time,
I know that “it” comes from Esther’s heart; my love is reborn, I write the book because
she exists, because she has survived all the difficult times without complaint, without
ever once seeing herself as a victim. I start by describing the experience that has affected
me most profoundly in those last few years—the road to Santiago.

As I write, I realize that the way I see the world is going through a series of major
changes. For many years, I studied and practiced magic, alchemy, and the occult; I was
fascinated by the idea of a small group of people being in possession of an immense
power that could in no way be shared with the rest of humanity, because it would be far
too dangerous to allow such vast potential to fall into inexperienced hands. I was a
member of secret societies, I became involved in exotic sects, I bought obscure,
extremely expensive books, spent an enormous amount of time performing rituals and
invocations. I was always joining and leaving different groups and fraternities, always
thinking that I had finally met the person who could reveal to me the mysteries of the
invisible world, but in the end I was always disappointed to discover that most of these
people, however well-intentioned, were merely following this or that dogma and tended
to be fanatics, because fanaticism is the only way to put an end to the doubts that
constantly trouble the human soul.
I discovered that many of the rituals did actually work, but I discovered, too, that those
who declared themselves to be the masters and holders of the secrets of life, who claimed
to know techniques that gave them the ability to achieve their every desire, had
completely lost touch with the teachings of the ancients. Following the road to Santiago,
coming into contact with ordinary people, discovering that the universe spoke its own
language of “signs” and that, in order to understand this language, we had only to look
with an open mind at what was going on around us—all this made me wonder if the
occult really was the one doorway into those mysteries. In my book about the road to
Santiago, I discuss other possible ways of growing and end with this thought: All you
have to do is to pay attention; lessons always arrive when you are ready, and if you can
read the signs, you will learn everything you need to know in order to take the next step.

We humans have two great problems: the first is knowing when to begin; the second is
knowing when to stop.
A week later, I have finished the first, second, and third draft. Madrid is no longer killing
me, it is time to go back home. I feel that one cycle has ended and that I urgently need to
begin another. I say goodbye to the city as I have always said goodbye in life: thinking
that I might change my mind and come back one day.
I return to my own country with Esther, convinced that it might be time to get another
job, but until I do (and I don’t because I don’t need to) I continue revising the book. I
can’t believe that anyone will have much interest in the experiences of one man following
a romantic but difficult route across Spain.
Four months later, when I am busy on my tenth draft, I discover that both the typescript
and Esther have gone. Just as I’m about to go mad with anxiety, she returns with a receipt
from the post office—she has sent it off to an old boyfriend of hers, who now runs a
small publishing house.
The ex-boyfriend publishes the book. There is not a word about it in the press, but a few
people buy it. They recommend it to other people, who also buy it and recommend it to
others. Six months later, the first edition has sold out. A year later, there have been three
more print runs and I am beginning to earn money from the one thing I never dreamed I
would—from literature.
I don’t know how long this dream will continue, but I decide to live each moment as if it
were the last. And I see that this success opens the door I have so long wanted to open:
other publishers are keen to publish my next book.
Obviously, I can’t follow the road to Santiago every year, so what am I going to write
about next? Will I have to endure the same rigmarole of sitting down in front of the
typewriter and then finding myself doing everything but writing sentences and
paragraphs? It’s important that I continue to share my vision of the world and to describe
my experiences of life. I try for a few days and for many nights, and decide that it’s
impossible. Then, one evening, I happen upon (happen upon?) an interesting story in The
Thousand and One Nights; in it I find the symbol of my own path, something that helps
me to understand who I am and why I took so long to make the decision that was always
there waiting for me. I use that story as the basis for another story about a shepherd who
goes in search of his dream, a treasure hidden in the pyramids of Egypt. I speak of the
love that lies waiting for him there, as Esther had waited for me while I walked around
and around in circles.
I am no longer someone dreaming of becoming something: I am. I am the shepherd
crossing the desert, but where is the alchemist who helps him to carry on? When I finish
this novel, I don’t entirely understand what I have written: it is like a fairy tale for grown-
ups, and grown-ups are more interested in war, sex, or stories about power. Nevertheless,
the publisher accepts it, the book is published, and my readers once again take it into the
bestseller lists.
Three years later, my marriage is in excellent shape; I am doing what I always wanted to
do; the first translation appears, then the second, and success—slowly but surely—takes
my work to the four corners of the earth.
I decide to move to Paris because of its cafés, its writers, and its cultural life. I discover
that none of this exists anymore: the cafés are full of tourists and photographs of the
people who made those places famous. Most of the writers there are more concerned with
style than content; they strive to be original, but succeed only in being dull. They are
locked in their own little world, and I learn an interesting French expression: renvoyer
l’ascenseur, meaning literally “to send the elevator back,” but used metaphorically to
mean “to return a favor.” In practice, this means that I say nice things about your book,
you say nice things about mine, and thus we create a whole new cultural life, a
revolution, an apparently new philosophy; we suffer because no one understands us, but
then that’s what happened with all the geniuses of the past: being misunderstood by one’s
contemporaries is surely just part and parcel of being a great artist.
They “send the elevator back,” and, at first, such writers have some success: people don’t
want to run the risk of openly criticizing something they don’t understand, but they soon
realize they are being conned and stop believing what the critics say.
The Internet and its simple language are all that it takes to change the world. A parallel
world emerges in Paris: new writers struggle to make their words and their souls
understood. I join these new writers in cafés that no one has heard of, because neither the
writers nor the cafés are as yet famous. I develop my style alone and I learn from a
publisher all I need to know about mutual support.

What is this Favor Bank?”
“You know. Everyone knows.”
“Possibly, but I still haven’t quite grasped what you’re saying.”
“It was an American writer who first mentioned it. It’s the most powerful bank in the
world, and you’ll find it in every sphere of life.”
“Yes, but I come from a country without a literary tradition. What favors could I do for
anyone?”
“That doesn’t matter in the least. Let me give you an example: I know that you’re an upand-coming
writer and that, one day, you’ll be very influential. I know this because, like
you, I too was once ambitious, independent, honest. I no longer have the energy I once
had, but I want to help you because I can’t or don’t want to grind to a halt just yet. I’m
not dreaming about retirement, I’m still dreaming about the fascinating struggle that is
life, power, and glory.
“I start making deposits in your account—not cash deposits, you understand, but
contacts. I introduce you to such-and-such a person, I arrange certain deals, as long as
they’re legal. You know that you owe me something, but I never ask you for anything.”
“And then one day…”
“Exactly. One day, I’ll ask you for a favor and you could, of course, say no, but you’re
conscious of being in my debt. You do what I ask, I continue to help you, and other
people see that you’re a decent, loyal sort of person and so they too make deposits in your
account—always in the form of contacts, because this world is made up of contacts and
nothing else. They too will one day ask you for a favor, and you will respect and help the
people who have helped you, and, in time, you’ll have spread your net worldwide, you’ll
know everyone you need to know and your influence will keep on growing.”
“I could refuse to do what you ask me to do.”
“You could. The Favor Bank is a risky investment, just like any other bank. You refuse to
grant the favor I asked you, in the belief that I helped you because you deserved to be
helped, because you’re the best and everyone should automatically recognize your talent.
Fine, I say thank you very much and ask someone else into whose account I’ve also made
various deposits; but from then on, everyone knows, without me having to say a word,
that you are not to be trusted.
“You’ll grow only half as much as you could have grown, and certainly not as much as
you would have liked to. At a certain point, your life will begin to decline, you got
halfway, but not all the way, you are half-happy and half-sad, neither frustrated nor
fulfilled. You’re neither cold nor hot, you’re lukewarm, and as an evangelist in some holy
book says: ‘Lukewarm things are not pleasing to the palate.’”

The publisher places a lot of deposits—or contacts—into my account at the Favor
Bank. I learn, I suffer, my books are translated into French, and, in the tradition of that
country, the stranger is welcomed. Not only that, the stranger is an enormous success!
Ten years on, I have a large apartment with a view over the Seine, I am loved by my
readers and loathed by the critics (who adored me until I sold my first 100,000 copies,
but, from that moment on, I ceased to be “a misunderstood genius”). I always repay
promptly any deposits made and soon I too am a lender—of contacts. My influence
grows. I learn to ask for favors and to do the favors others ask of me.
Esther gets permission to work as a journalist in France. Apart from the normal conflicts
in any marriage, I am contented. I understand for the first time that all the frustrations I
felt about previous love affairs and marriages had nothing to do with the women
involved, but with my own bitterness. Esther, however, was the only woman who
understood one very simple thing: in order to be able to find her, I first had to find
myself. We have been together for eight years; I believe she is the love of my life, and
although I do occasionally (or, to be honest, frequently) fall in love with other women
who cross my path, I never consider the possibility of divorce. I never ask her if she
knows about my extramarital affairs. She never makes any comment on the subject.
That is why I am astonished when, as we are leaving a cinema, she tells me that she has
asked her magazine if she can file a report on a civil war in Africa.

What are you saying?”
“That I want to be a war correspondent.”
“You’re mad. You don’t need to do that. You’re already doing the work you want to do
now. You earn good money—not that you need that money to live on. You have all the
contacts you need in the Favor Bank. You have talent and you’ve earned your colleagues’
respect.”
“All right then, let’s just say I need to be alone.”
“Because of me?”
“We’ve built our lives together. I love my man and he loves me, even though he’s not
always the most faithful of husbands.”
“You’ve never said anything about that before.”
“Because it doesn’t matter to me. I mean, what is fidelity? The feeling that I possess a
body and a soul that aren’t mine? Do you imagine I haven’t been to bed with other men
during all these years we’ve been together?”
“I don’t care and I don’t want to know.”
“Well, neither do I.”
“So, what’s all this about wanting to write about a war in some godforsaken part of the
world?”
“As I said, I need to.”
“Haven’t you got everything you need?”
“I have everything a woman could want.”
“What’s wrong with your life then?”
“Precisely that. I have everything, but I’m not happy. And I’m not the only one either;
over the years, I’ve met and interviewed all kinds of people: the rich, the poor, the
powerful, and those who just make do. I’ve seen the same infinite bitterness in
everyone’s eyes, a sadness which people weren’t always prepared to acknowledge, but
which, regardless of what they were telling me, was nevertheless there. Are you
listening?”
“Yes, I’m listening. I was just thinking. So, according to you, no one is happy?”
“Some people appear to be happy, but they simply don’t give the matter much thought.
Others make plans: I’m going to have a husband, a home, two children, a house in the
country. As long as they’re busy doing that, they’re like bulls looking for the bullfighter:
they react instinctively, they blunder on, with no idea where the target is. They get their
car, sometimes they even get a Ferrari, and they think that’s the meaning of life, and they
never question it. Yet their eyes betray the sadness that even they don’t know they carry
in their soul. Are you happy?”
“I don’t know.”
“I don’t know if everyone is unhappy. I know they’re all busy: working overtime,
worrying about their children, their husband, their career, their degree, what they’re going
to do tomorrow, what they need to buy, what they need to have in order not to feel
inferior, etc. Very few people actually say to me: ‘I’m unhappy.’ Most say: ‘I’m fine,
I’ve got everything I ever wanted.’ Then I ask: ‘What makes you happy?’ Answer: ‘I’ve
got everything a person could possibly want—a family, a home, work, good health.’ I ask
again: ‘Have you ever stopped to wonder if that’s all there is to life?’ Answer: ‘Yes,
that’s all there is.’ I insist: ‘So the meaning of life is work, family, children who will
grow up and leave you, a wife or husband who will become more like a friend than a real
lover. And, of course, one day your work will end too. What will you do when that
happens?’ Answer: There is no answer. They change the subject.”
“No, what they say is: ‘When the children have grown up, when my husband—or my
wife—has become more my friend than my passionate lover, when I retire, then I’ll have
time to do what I always wanted to do: travel.’ Question: ‘But didn’t you say you were
happy now? Aren’t you already doing what you always wanted to do?’ Then they say
they’re very busy and change the subject.”
“If I insist, they always do come up with something they’re lacking. The businessman
hasn’t yet closed the deal he wanted, the housewife would like to have more
independence and more money, the boy who’s in love is afraid of losing his girlfriend,
the new graduate wonders if he chose his career or if it was chosen for him, the dentist
wanted to be a singer, the singer wanted to be a politician, the politician wanted to be a
writer, the writer wanted to be a farmer. And even when I did meet someone who was
doing what he had chosen to do, that person’s soul was still in torment. He hadn’t found
peace yet either. So I’ll ask you again: ‘Are you happy?’”
“No. I have the woman I love, the career I always dreamed of having, the kind of
freedom that is the envy of all my friends, the travel, the honors, the praise. But there’s
something…”
“What?”
“I have the idea that, if I stopped, life would become meaningless.”
“You can’t just relax, look at Paris, take my hand and say: I’ve got what I wanted, now
let’s enjoy what life remains to us.”
“I can look at Paris, take your hand, but I can’t say those words.”
“I bet you everyone walking along this street now is feeling the same thing. The elegant
woman who just passed us spends her days trying to hold back time, always checking the
scales, because she thinks that is what love depends on. Look across the street: a couple
with two children. They feel intensely happy when they’re out with their children, but, at
the same time, their subconscious keeps them in a constant state of terror: they think of
the job they might lose, the disease they might catch, the health insurance that might not
come up with the goods, one of the children getting run over. And in trying to distract
themselves, they try as well to find a way of getting free of those tragedies, of protecting
themselves from the world.”
“And the beggar on the corner?”
“I don’t know about him. I’ve never spoken to a beggar. He’s certainly the picture of
misery, but his eyes, like the eyes of any beggar, seem to be hiding something. His
sadness is so obvious that I can’t quite believe in it.”
“What’s missing?”
“I haven’t a clue. I look at the celebrity magazines with everyone smiling and contented,
but since I am myself married to a celebrity, I know that it isn’t quite like that: everyone
is laughing and having fun at that moment, in that photo, but later that night, or in the
morning, the story is always quite different. ‘What do I have to do in order to continue
appearing in this magazine?’ ‘How can I disguise the fact that I no longer have enough
money to support my luxurious lifestyle?’ ‘How can I best manipulate my luxurious
lifestyle to make it seem even more luxurious than anyone else’s?’ ‘The actress in the
photo with me and with whom I’m smiling and celebrating could steal a part from me
tomorrow!’ ‘Am I better dressed than she is? Why are we smiling when we loathe each
other?’ ‘Why do we sell happiness to the readers of this magazine when we are
profoundly unhappy ourselves, the slaves of fame.’”
“We’re not the slaves of fame.”
“Don’t get paranoid. I’m not talking about us.”
“What do you think is going on, then?”
“Years ago, I read a book that told an interesting story. Just suppose that Hitler had won
the war, wiped out all the Jews and convinced his people that there really was such a
thing as a master race. The history books start to be changed, and, a hundred years later,
his successors manage to wipe out all the Indians. Three hundred years later and the
Blacks have been eliminated too. It takes five hundred years, but, finally, the all-powerful
war machine succeeds in erasing all Asians from the face of the earth as well. The history
books speak of remote battles waged against barbarians, but no one reads too closely,
because it’s of no importance.
“Two thousand years after the birth of Nazism, in a bar in Tokyo, a city that has been
inhabited for five centuries now by tall, blue-eyed people, Hans and Fritz are enjoying a
beer. At one point, Hans looks at Fritz and asks: ‘Fritz, do you think it was always like
this?’
“‘What?’ asks Fritz.
“‘The world.’
“‘Of course the world was always like this, isn’t that what we were taught?’
“‘Of course, I don’t know what made me ask such a stupid question,’ says Hans. They
finish their beer, talk about other things and forget the question entirely.”
“You don’t even need to go that far into the future, you just have to go back two thousand
years. Can you see yourself worshipping a guillotine, a scaffold, or an electric chair?”
“I know where you’re heading—to that worst of all human tortures, the cross. I remember
that Cicero referred to it as ‘an abominable punishment’ that inflicted terrible suffering
on the crucified person before he or she died. And yet, nowadays people wear it around
their neck, hang it on their bedroom wall, and have come to identify it as a religious
symbol, forgetting that they are looking at an instrument of torture.”
“Two hundred and fifty years passed before someone decided that it was time to abolish
the pagan festivals surrounding the winter solstice, the time when the sun is farthest from
the earth. The apostles, and those who came after them, were too busy spreading Jesus’
message to worry about the natalis invict Solis, the Mithraic festival of the birth of the
sun, which occurred on December 25. Then a bishop decided that these solstice festivals
were a threat to the faith and that was that! Now we have masses, Nativity scenes,
presents, sermons, plastic babies in wooden mangers, and the cast-iron conviction that
Christ was born on that very day!”
“And then there’s the Christmas tree. Do you know where that comes from?”
“No idea.”
“Saint Boniface decided to ‘christianize’ a ritual intended to honor the god Odin when he
was a child. Once a year, the Germanic tribes would place presents around an oak tree for
the children to find. They thought this would bring joy to the pagan deity.”
“Going back to the story of Hans and Fritz: do you think that civilization, human
relations, our hopes, our conquests, are all just the product of some other garbled story?”
“When you wrote about the road to Santiago, you came to the same conclusion, didn’t
you? You used to believe that only a select few knew the meaning of magic symbols, but
now you realize that we all know the meaning, it’s just that we’ve forgotten it.”
“Knowing that doesn’t make any difference. People do their best not to remember and
not to accept the immense magical potential they possess, because that would upset their
neat little universes.”
“But we all have the ability, don’t we?”
“Absolutely, we just don’t all have the courage to follow our dreams and to follow the
signs. Perhaps that’s where the sadness comes from.”
“I don’t know. And I’m not saying that I’m unhappy all the time. I have fun, I love you, I
adore my work. Yet now and then, I feel this profound sadness, occasionally mingled
with feelings of guilt or fear; the feeling passes, but always comes back later on, and then
passes off again. Like Hans, I ask that same question; when I can’t answer it, I simply
forget. I could go and help starving children, set up a foundation for street children, start
trying to save people in the name of Jesus, do something that would give me the feeling I
was being useful, but I don’t want to.”
“So why do you want to go and cover this war?”
“Because I think that in time of war, men live life at the limit; after all, they could die the
next day. Anyone living like that must act differently.”
“So you want to find an answer to Hans’s question?”
“Yes, I do.”

Today, in this beautiful suite in the Hôtel Bristol, with the Eiffel Tower glittering for
five minutes every time the clock strikes the hour, with an empty bottle of wine beside
me and my cigarettes fast running out, with people greeting me as if nothing very serious
had happened, I ask myself: Was it then, coming out of the cinema, that it all began?
Should I have let her go off in search of that garbled story or should I have put my foot
down and told her to forget the whole idea because she was my wife and I needed her
with me, needed her support?
Nonsense. At the time, I knew, as I know now, that I had no option but to accept what she
wanted. If I had said: “Choose between me and becoming a war correspondent,” I would
have been betraying everything that Esther had done for me. I wasn’t convinced by her
declared aim—to go in search of “a garbled story”—but I concluded that she needed a bit
of freedom, to get out and about, to experience strong emotions. And what was wrong
with that?
I accepted, not without first making it clear that this constituted a very large withdrawal
from the Favor Bank (which, when I think about it now, seems a ludicrous thing to say).
For two years, Esther followed various conflicts at close quarters, changing continents
more often than she changed her shoes. Whenever she came back, I thought that this time
she would give it up—it’s just not possible to live for very long in a place where there’s
no decent food, no daily bath, and no cinemas or theaters. I asked her if she had found the
answer to Hans’s question, and she always told me that she was on the right track, and I
had to be satisfied with that. Sometimes, she was away from home for months at a time;
contrary to what it says in the “official history of marriage” (I was starting to use her
terminology), that distance only made our love grow stronger, and showed us how
important we were to each other. Our relationship, which I thought had reached its ideal
point when we moved to Paris, was getting better and better.
As I understand it, she first met Mikhail when she needed a translator to accompany her
to some country in Central Asia. At first, she talked about him with great enthusiasm—he
was a very sensitive person, someone who saw the world as it really was and not as we
had been told it should be. He was five years younger than she, but had a quality that
Esther described as “magical.” I listened patiently and politely, as if I were really
interested in that boy and his ideas, but the truth is, I was far away, going over in my
mind all the things I had to do, ideas for articles, answers to questions from journalists
and publishers, strategies for how to seduce a particular woman who appeared to be
interested in me, plans for future book promotions.
I don’t know if Esther noticed this. I certainly failed to notice that Mikhail gradually
disappeared from our conversations, then vanished completely. Esther’s behavior became
increasingly eccentric: even when she was in Paris, she started going out several nights a
week, telling me that she was researching an article on beggars.
I thought she must be having an affair. I agonized for a whole week and asked myself:
should I tell her my doubts or just pretend that nothing is happening? I decided to ignore
it, on the principle that “what the eye doesn’t see, the heart doesn’t grieve over.” I was
utterly convinced that there wasn’t the slightest possibility of her leaving me; she had
worked so hard to help me become the person I am, and it would be illogical to let all that
go for some ephemeral affair.
If I had really been interested in Esther’s world, I should at least have asked what had
happened to her translator and his “magical” sensibility. I should have been suspicious of
that silence, that lack of information. I should have asked to go with her on one of those
“research trips” to visit beggars.
When she occasionally asked if I was interested in her work, my answer was always the
same: “Yes, I’m interested, but I don’t want to interfere, I want you to be free to follow
your dream in your chosen way, just as you helped me to do the same.”
This, of course, was tantamount to saying that I wasn’t the slightest bit interested. But
because people always believe what they want to believe, Esther seemed satisfied with
my response.

The words spoken by the inspector when I was released from the police cell come back to
me again: You’re a free man. But what is freedom? Is it seeing that your husband isn’t
interested in what you are doing? Is it feeling alone and having no one with whom to
share your innermost feelings, because the person you married is entirely focused on his
own work, on his important, magnificent, difficult career?
I look at the Eiffel Tower: another hour has passed, and it is glittering again as if it were
made of diamonds. I have no idea how often this has happened since I have been at the
window.
I know that, in the name of the freedom of our marriage, I did not notice that Mikhail had
disappeared from my wife’s conversations, only to reappear in a bar and disappear again,
this time taking her with him and leaving behind the famous, successful writer as prime
suspect.
Or, worse still, as a man abandoned.
HANS’S QUESTION
In Buenos Aires, the Zahir is a common 20-centavo coin; the letters N and T and the
number 2 bear the marks of a knife or a letter opener; 1929 is the date engraved on the
reverse. (In Gujarat, at the end of the eighteenth century, the Zahir was a tiger; in Java, it
was a blind man from the Surakarta Mosque who was stoned by the faithful; in Persia, an
astrolabe that Nadir Shah ordered to be thrown into the sea; in the Mahdi’s prisons, in
around 1892, a small compass that had been touched by Rudolf Karl von Slatin….)

A year later, I wake thinking about the story by Jorge Luis Borges, about something
which, once touched or seen, can never be forgotten, and which gradually so fills our
thoughts that we are driven to madness. My Zahir is not a romantic metaphor—a blind
man, a compass, a tiger, or a coin.
It has a name, and her name is Esther.
Immediately after leaving prison, I appeared on the covers of various scandal sheets: they
began by alleging a possible crime, but, in order to avoid ending up in court, they always
concluded with the statement that I had been cleared. (Cleared? I hadn’t even been
accused!) They allowed a week to pass; they checked to see if the sales had been good
(they had, because I was the kind of writer who was normally above suspicion, and
everyone wanted to find out how it was possible for a man who writes about spirituality
to have such a dark side). Then they returned to the attack, alleging that my wife had run
away because of my many extramarital affairs: a German magazine even hinted at a
possible relationship with a singer, twenty years my junior, who said she had met me in
Oslo, in Norway (this was true, but the meeting had only taken place because of the
Favor Bank—a friend of mine had asked me to go and had been with us throughout the
only supper we had together). The singer said that there was nothing between us (so why
put a photo of us on the cover?) and took the opportunity to announce that she was
releasing a new album: she had used both the magazine and me, and I still don’t know
whether the failure of the album was a consequence of this kind of cheap publicity. (The
album wasn’t bad, by the way—what ruined everything were the press releases.)
The scandal over the famous writer did not last long; in Europe, and especially in France,
infidelity is not only accepted, it is even secretly admired. And no one likes to read about
the sort of thing that could so easily happen to them.
The topic disappeared from the front covers, but the hypotheses continued: she had been
kidnapped, she had left home because of physical abuse (photo of a waiter saying that we
often argued: I remember that I did, in fact, have an argument with Esther in a restaurant
about her views on a South American writer, which were completely opposed to mine). A
British tabloid alleged—and luckily this had no serious repercussions—that my wife had
gone into hiding with an Islamist terrorist organization.
This world is so full of betrayals, divorces, murders, and assassination attempts that a
month later the subject had been forgotten by the ordinary public. Years of experience
had taught me that this kind of thing would never affect my faithful readership (it had
happened before, when a journalist on an Argentinian television program claimed that he
had “proof” that I had had a secret meeting in Chile with the future first lady of the
country—but my books remained on the bestseller lists). As an American artist almost
said: Sensationalism was only made to last fifteen minutes. My main concern was quite
different: to reorganize my life, to find a new love, to go back to writing books, and to
put away any memories of my wife in the little drawer that exists on the frontier between
love and hate.
Or should I say memories of my ex-wife (I needed to get used to the term).
Part of what I had foreseen in that hotel room did come to pass. For a while, I barely left
the apartment: I didn’t know how to face my friends, how to look them in the eye and say
simply: “My wife has left me for a younger man.” When I did go out, no one asked me
anything, but after a few glasses of wine I felt obliged to bring the subject up—as if I
could read everyone’s mind, as if I really believed that they had nothing more to occupy
them than what was happening in my life, but that they were too polite or smug to say
anything. Depending on my mood, Esther was either a saint who deserved better or a
treacherous, perfidious woman who had embroiled me in such a complicated situation
that I had even been thought a criminal.
Friends, acquaintances, publishers, people I sat next to at the many gala dinners I was
obliged to attend, listened with some curiosity at first. Gradually, though, I noticed that
they tended to change the subject; they had been interested in the subject at some point,
but it was no longer part of their current curiosities: they were more interested in talking
about the actress who had been murdered by a singer or about the adolescent girl who had
written a book about her affairs with well-known politicians. One day, in Madrid, I
noticed that the number of guests at events and suppers was beginning to fall off.
Although it may have been good for my soul to unburden myself of my feelings, to blame
or to bless Esther, I began to realize that I was becoming something even worse than a
betrayed husband: I was becoming the kind of boring person no one wants to be around.
I decided, from then on, to suffer in silence, and the invitations once more flooded in
through my mailbox.
But the Zahir, about which I initially used to think with either irritation or affection,
continued to grow in my soul. I started looking for Esther in every woman I met. I would
see her in every bar, every cinema, at bus stops. More than once I ordered a taxi driver to
stop in the middle of the street or to follow someone, until I could persuade myself that
the person was not the person I was looking for.
With the Zahir beginning to occupy my every thought, I needed an antidote, something
that would not take me to the brink of despair.
There was only one possible solution: a girlfriend.
I encountered three or four women I felt drawn to, but then I met Marie, a thirty-fiveyear-old
French actress. She was the only one who did not spout such nonsense as: “I like
you as a man, not as the celebrity everyone wants to meet” or “I wish you weren’t quite
so famous,” or worse still: “I’m not interested in money.” She was the only one who was
genuinely pleased at my success, because she too was famous and knew that celebrity
counts. Celebrity is an aphrodisiac. It was good for a woman’s ego to be with a man and
know that he had chosen her even though he had had the pick of many others.
We were often seen together at parties and receptions; there was speculation about our
relationship, but neither she nor I confirmed or denied anything, and the matter was left
hanging, and all that remained for the magazines was to wait for the photo of the famous
kiss—which never came, because both she and I considered such public exhibitionism
vulgar. She got on with her filming and I with my work; when I could, I would travel to
Milan, and when she could, she would meet me in Paris; we were close, but not
dependent on each other.
Marie pretended not to know what was going on in my soul, and I pretended not to know
what was going on in hers (an impossible love for a married neighbor, even though she
could have had any man she wanted). We were friends, companions, we enjoyed the
same things; I would even go so far as to say that there was between us a kind of love,
but different from the love I felt for Esther or that Marie felt for her neighbor.
I started taking part in book signings again, I accepted invitations to give lectures, write
articles, attend charity dinners, appear on television programs, help out with projects for
up-and-coming young artists. I did everything except what I should have been doing,
namely, writing a book.
This didn’t matter to me, however, for in my heart of hearts I believed that my career as a
writer was over, because the woman who had made me begin was no longer there. I had
lived my dream intensely while it lasted, I had got further than most people are lucky
enough to get, I could spend the rest of my life having fun.
I thought this every morning. In the afternoon, I realized that the only thing I really liked
doing was writing. By nightfall, there I was once more trying to persuade myself that I
had fulfilled my dream and should try something new.

The following year was a Holy Year in Spain, the Año Santo Compostelano, which
occurs whenever the day of Saint James of Compostela, July 25, falls on a Sunday. A
special door to the cathedral in Santiago stands open for 365 days, and, according to
tradition, anyone who goes through that door receives a series of special blessings.
There were various commemorative events throughout Spain, and since I was extremely
grateful for the pilgrimage I had made, I decided to take part in at least one event: a talk,
in January, in the Basque country. In order to get out of my routine—trying to write a
book/going to a party/to the airport/visiting Marie in Milan/going out to supper/to a
hotel/to the airport/surfing the Internet/going to the airport/to an interview/to another
airport—I chose to drive the 1,400 kilometers there alone.
Everywhere—even those places I have never visited before—reminds me of my private
Zahir. I think how Esther would love to see this, how much she would enjoy eating in this
restaurant or walking by this river. I spend the night in Bayonne and, before I go to sleep,
I turn on the television and learn that there are about five thousand trucks stuck on the
frontier between France and Spain, due to a violent and entirely unexpected snowstorm.
I wake up thinking that I should simply drive back to Paris: I have an excellent excuse for
canceling the engagement, and the organizers will understand perfectly—the traffic is in
chaos, there is ice on the roads, both the French and Spanish governments are advising
people not to leave home this weekend because the risk of accidents is so high. The
situation is worse than it was last night: the morning paper reports that on one stretch of
road alone seventeen thousand people are trapped; civil defense teams have been
mobilized to provide them with food and temporary shelters, since many people have
already run out of fuel and cannot use their car heaters.
The hotel staff tell me that if I really have to travel, if it’s a matter of life or death, there is
a minor road I can take, which, while it will avoid the blockages, will add about two
hours to my journey time, and no one can guarantee what state the road will be in.
Instinctively, I decide to go ahead; something is forcing me on, out onto the icy asphalt
and to the hours spent patiently waiting in bottlenecks.
Perhaps it is the name of the city: Vitória—Victory. Perhaps it is the feeling that I have
grown too used to comfort and have lost my ability to improvise in crisis situations.
Perhaps it is the enthusiasm of the people who are, at this moment, trying to restore a
cathedral built many centuries ago and who, in order to draw attention to their efforts,
have invited a few writers to give talks. Or perhaps it is the old saying of the
conquistadors of the Americas: “It is not life that matters, but the journey.”
And so I keep on journeying. After many long, tense hours, I reach Vitória, where some
even tenser people are waiting for me. They say that there hasn’t been a snowstorm like it
for more than thirty years, they thank me for making the effort, and continue with the
official program, which includes a visit to the Cathedral of Santa María.
A young woman with shining eyes starts telling me the story. To begin with there was the
city wall. The wall remained, but one part of it was used to build a chapel. Many years
passed, and the chapel became a church. Another century passed, and the church became
a Gothic cathedral. The cathedral had had its moments of glory, there had been structural
problems, for a time it had been abandoned, then restoration work had distorted the whole
shape of the building, but each generation thought it had solved the problem and would
rework the original plans. Thus, in the centuries that followed, they raised a wall here,
took down a beam there, added a buttress over there, created or bricked up stained-glass
windows.
And the cathedral withstood it all.
I walk through the skeleton of the cathedral, studying the restoration work currently being
carried out: this time the architects guarantee that they have found the perfect solution.
Everywhere there are metal supports, scaffolding, grand theories about what to do next,
and some criticism about what was done in the past.
And suddenly, in the middle of the central nave, I realize something very important: the
cathedral is me, it is all of us. We are all growing and changing shape, we notice certain
weaknesses that need to be corrected, we don’t always choose the best solution, but we
carry on regardless, trying to remain upright and decent, in order to do honor not to the
walls or the doors or the windows, but to the empty space inside, the space where we
worship and venerate what is dearest and most important to us.
Yes, we are all cathedrals, there is no doubt about it; but what lies in the empty space of
my inner cathedral?
Esther, the Zahir.
She fills everything. She is the only reason I am alive. I look around, I prepare myself for
the talk I am to give, and I understand why I braved the snow, the traffic jams, and the ice
on the roads: in order to be reminded that every day I need to rebuild myself and to
accept—for the first time in my entire existence—that I love another human being more
than I love myself.
On the way back to Paris—in far more favorable weather conditions—I am in a kind of
trance: I do not think, I merely concentrate on the traffic. When I get home, I ask the
maid not to let anyone in, and ask her if she can sleep over for the next few nights and
make me breakfast, lunch, and supper. I stamp on the small apparatus that connects me to
the Internet, destroying it completely. I unplug the telephone. I put my cell phone in a
box and send it to my publisher, saying that he should only give it back to me when I
come around personally to pick it up.
For a week, I walk by the Seine each morning, and when I get back, I lock myself in my
study. As if I were listening to the voice of an angel, I write a book, or, rather, a letter, a
long letter to the woman of my dreams, to the woman I love and will always love. This
book might one day reach her hands and even if it doesn’t, I am now a man at peace with
his spirit. I no longer wrestle with my wounded pride, I no longer look for Esther on
every corner, in every bar and cinema, at every supper. I no longer look for her in Marie
or in the newspapers.
On the contrary, I am pleased that she exists; she has shown me that I am capable of a
love of which I myself knew nothing, and this leaves me in a state of grace.
I accept the Zahir, and will let it lead me into a state of either holiness or madness.

ATime to Rend and a Time to Sew—the title is from a line in Ecclesiastes—was
published at the end of April. By the second week of May, it was already number one on
the bestseller lists.
The literary supplements, which have never been kind to me, redoubled their attacks. I
cut out some of the key phrases and stuck them in a notebook along with reviews from
previous years; they said basically the same thing, merely changing the title of the book:
“…once again, despite the troubled times we live in, the author offers us an escape from
reality with a story about love…” (as if people could live without love).
“…short sentences, superficial style…” (as if long sentences equaled profundity).
“…the author has discovered the secret of success—marketing…” (as if I had been born
in a country with a long literary tradition and had had millions to invest in my first book).
“…it will sell as well as all his other books, which just proves how unprepared human
beings are to face up to the encircling tragedy…” (as if they knew what it meant to be
prepared).
Some reviews, however, were different, adding that I was profiting from last year’s
scandal in order to make even more money. As always, these negative reviews only
served to sell more of my books: my faithful readers bought the book anyway, and those
who had forgotten about the whole sorry business were reminded of it again and so also
bought copies, because they wanted to hear my version of Esther’s disappearance (since
the book was not about that, but was, rather, a hymn to love, they must have been sorely
disappointed and would doubtless have decided that the critics were spot-on). The rights
were immediately sold to all the countries where my books were usually published.
Marie, who read the typescript before I sent it to the publisher, showed herself to be the
woman I had hoped she was: instead of being jealous, or saying that I shouldn’t bare my
soul like that, she encouraged me to go ahead with it and was thrilled when it was a
success. At the time, she was reading the teachings of a little-known mystic, whom she
quoted in all our conversations.

When people praise us, we should always keep a close eye on how we behave.”
“The critics never praise me.”
“I mean your readers: you’ve received more letters than ever. You’ll end up believing
that you’re better than you are, and allow yourself to slip into a false sense of security,
which could be very dangerous.”
“Ever since my visit to the cathedral in Vitória, I do think I’m better than I thought I was,
but that has nothing to do with readers’ letters. Absurd though it may seem, I discovered
love.”
“Great. What I like about the book is the fact that, at no point, do you blame your exwife.
And you don’t blame yourself either.”
“I’ve learned not to waste my time doing that.”
“Good. The universe takes care of correcting our mistakes.”
“Do you think Esther’s disappearance was some kind of ‘correction,’ then?”
“I don’t believe in the curative powers of suffering and tragedy; they happen because
they’re part of life and shouldn’t be seen as a punishment. Generally speaking, the
universe tells us when we’re wrong by taking away what is most important to us: our
friends. And that, I think I’m right in saying, is what was happening with you.”
“I learned something recently: our true friends are those who are with us when the good
things happen. They cheer us on and are pleased by our triumphs. False friends only
appear at difficult times, with their sad, supportive faces, when, in fact, our suffering is
serving to console them for their miserable lives. When things were bad last year, various
people I had never even seen before turned up to ‘console’ me. I hate that.”
“I’ve had the same thing happen to me.”
“But I’m very grateful that you came into my life, Marie.”
“Don’t be too grateful too soon, our relationship isn’t strong enough. As a matter of fact,
I’ve been thinking of moving to Paris or asking you to come and live in Milan: it
wouldn’t make any difference to either of us in terms of work. You always work at home
and I always work away. Would you like to change the subject now or shall we continue
discussing it as a possibility?”
“I’d like to change the subject.”
“Let’s talk about something else then. It took a lot of courage to write that book. What
surprises me, though, is that you don’t once mention the young man.”
“I’m not interested in him.”
“You must be. Every now and again you must ask yourself: Why did she choose him?”
“I never ask myself that.”
“You’re lying. I’d certainly like to know why my neighbor didn’t divorce his boring,
smiling wife, always busy with the housework, the cooking, the children, and the bills. If
I ask myself that, you must too.”
“Are you saying that I hate him because he stole my wife?”
“No, I want to hear you say that you forgive him.”
“I can’t do that.”
“It’s hard, I know, but you’ve no option. If you don’t do it, you’ll always be thinking of
the pain he caused you and that pain will never pass. I’m not saying you’ve got to like
him. I’m not saying you should seek him out. I’m not suggesting you should start
thinking of him as an angel. What was his name now? Something Russian wasn’t it?”
“It doesn’t matter what his name was.”
“You see? You don’t even want to say his name. Are you superstitious?”
“Mikhail. There you are, that’s his name.”
“The energy of hatred won’t get you anywhere; but the energy of forgiveness, which
reveals itself through love, will transform your life in a positive way.”
“Now you’re sounding like some Tibetan sage, spouting stuff that is all very nice in
theory, but impossible in practice. Don’t forget, I’ve been hurt before.”
“Exactly, and you’re still carrying inside you the little boy, the school weakling, who had
to hide his tears from his parents. You still bear the marks of the skinny little boy who
couldn’t get a girlfriend and who was never any good at sports. You still haven’t
managed to heal the scars left by some of the injustices committed against you in your
life. But what good does that do?”
“Who told you about that?”
“I just know. I can see it in your eyes, and it doesn’t do you any good. All it does is feed
a constant desire to feel sorry for yourself, because you were the victim of people
stronger than you. Or else it makes you go to the other extreme and disguise yourself as
an avenger ready to strike out at the people who hurt you. Isn’t that a waste of time?”
“It’s just human.”
“Oh, it is, but it’s not intelligent or reasonable. Show some respect for your time on this
earth, and know that God has always forgiven you and always will.”

Looking around at the crowd gathered for my book signing at a megastore on the
Champs-Elysées, I thought: How many of these people will have had the same
experience I had with my wife?
Very few. Perhaps one or two. Even so, most of them would identify with what was in
my new book.
Writing is one of the most solitary activities in the world. Once every two years, I sit
down in front of the computer, gaze out on the unknown sea of my soul, and see a few
islands—ideas that have developed and which are ripe to be explored. Then I climb into
my boat—called The Word—and set out for the nearest island. On the way, I meet strong
currents, winds, and storms, but I keep rowing, exhausted, knowing that I have drifted
away from my chosen course and that the island I was trying to reach is no longer on my
horizon.
I can’t turn back, though, I have to continue somehow or else I’ll be lost in the middle of
the ocean; at that point, a series of terrifying scenarios flash through my mind, such as
spending the rest of my life talking about past successes, or bitterly criticizing new
writers, simply because I no longer have the courage to publish new books. Wasn’t my
dream to be a writer? Then I must continue creating sentences, paragraphs, chapters, and
go on writing until I die, and not allow myself to get caught in such traps as success or
failure. Otherwise, what meaning does my life have? Being able to buy an old mill in the
south of France and tending my garden? Giving lectures instead, because it’s easier to
talk than to write? Withdrawing from the world in a calculated, mysterious way, in order
to create a legend that will deprive me of many pleasures?
Shaken by these alarming thoughts, I find a strength and a courage I didn’t know I had:
they help me to venture into an unknown part of my soul. I let myself be swept along by
the current and finally anchor my boat at the island I was being carried toward. I spend
days and nights describing what I see, wondering why I’m doing this, telling myself that
it’s really not worth the pain and the effort, that I don’t need to prove anything to anyone,
that I’ve got what I wanted and far more than I ever dreamed of having.
I notice that I go through the same process as I did when writing my first book: I wake up
at nine o’clock in the morning, ready to sit down at my computer immediately after
breakfast; then I read the newspapers, go for a walk, visit the nearest bar for a chat, come
home, look at the computer, discover that I need to make several phone calls, look at the
computer again, by which time lunch is ready, and I sit eating and thinking that I really
ought to have started writing at eleven o’clock, but now I need a nap, I wake at five in the
afternoon, finally turn on the computer, go to check my e-mails, then remember that I’ve
destroyed my Internet connection; I could go to a place ten minutes away where I can get
online, but couldn’t I, just to free my conscience from these feelings of guilt, couldn’t I at
least write for half an hour?
I begin out of a feeling of duty, but suddenly “the thing” takes hold of me and I can’t
stop. The maid calls me for supper and I ask her not to interrupt me; an hour later, she
calls me again; I’m hungry, but I must write just one more line, one more sentence, one
more page. By the time I sit down at the table, the food is cold, I gobble it down and go
back to the computer—I am no longer in control of where I place my feet, the island is
being revealed to me, I am being propelled along its paths, finding things I have never
even thought or dreamed of. I drink a cup of coffee, and another, and at two o’clock in
the morning I finally stop writing, because my eyes are tired.
I go to bed, spend another hour making notes of things to use in the next paragraph—
notes which always prove completely useless, they serve only to empty my mind so that
sleep can come. I promise myself that the next morning, I’ll start at eleven o’clock
prompt. And the following day, the same thing happens—the walk, the conversations,
lunch, a nap, the feelings of guilt, then irritation at myself for destroying the Internet
connection, until I, at last, make myself sit down and write the first page….
Suddenly, two, three, four, eleven weeks have passed, and I know that I’m near the end;
I’m gripped by a feeling of emptiness, the feeling of someone who has set down in words
things he should have kept to himself. Now, though, I have to reach the final sentence—
and I do.
When I used to read biographies of writers, I always thought they were simply trying to
make their profession seem more interesting when they said that “the book writes itself,
the writer is just the typist.” Now I know that this is absolutely true, no one knows why
the current took them to that particular island and not to the one they wanted to reach.
The obsessive redrafting and editing begins, and when I can no longer bear to reread the
same words one more time, I send it to my publisher, where it is edited again, and then
published.
And it is a constant source of surprise to me to discover that other people were also in
search of that very island and that they find it in my book. One person tells another
person about it, the mysterious chain grows, and what the writer thought of as a solitary
exercise becomes a bridge, a boat, a means by which souls can travel and communicate.
From then on, I am no longer the man lost in the storm: I find myself through my readers,
I understand what I wrote when I see that others understand it too, but never before. On a
few rare occasions, like the one that is just about to happen, I manage to look those
people in the eye and then I understand that my soul is not alone.

At the appointed time, I start signing books. There is brief eye-to-eye contact and a
feeling of solidarity, joy, and mutual respect. There are handshakes, a few letters, gifts,
comments. Ninety minutes later, I ask for a ten-minute rest, no one complains, and my
publisher (as has become traditional at my book signings in France) orders champagne to
be served to everyone still in line. (I have tried to get this tradition adopted in other
countries, but they always say that French champagne is too expensive and end up
serving mineral water instead. But that, too, shows respect for those still waiting.)
I return to the table. Two hours later, contrary to what anyone observing the event might
think, I am not tired, but full of energy; I could carry on all night. The shop, however, has
closed its doors and the queue is dwindling. There are forty people left inside, they
become thirty, twenty, eleven, five, four, three, two…and suddenly our eyes meet.
“I waited until the end. I wanted to be the last because I have a message for you.”
I don’t know what to say. I glance to one side, at the publishers, salespeople, and
booksellers, who are all talking enthusiastically; soon we will go out to eat and drink and
share the excitement of the day and describe some of the strange things that happened
while I was signing books.
I have never seen him before, but I know who he is. I take the book from him and write:
“For Mikhail, with best wishes.”
I say nothing. I must not lose him—a word, a sentence, a sudden movement might cause
him to leave and never come back. In a fraction of a second, I understand that he and only
he can save me from the blessing—or the curse—of the Zahir, because he is the only one
who knows where to find it, and I will finally be able to ask the questions I have been
repeating to myself for so long.
“I wanted you to know that she’s all right, that she may even have read your book.”
The publishers, salespeople, and booksellers come over. They all embrace me and say it’s
been a great afternoon. Let’s go and relax and drink and talk about it all.
“I’d like to invite this young man to supper,” I say. “He was the last in the queue and he
can be the representative of all the other readers who were here with us today.”
“I can’t, I’m afraid. I have another engagement.”
And turning to me, rather startled, he adds: “I only came to give you that message.”
“What message?” asks one of the salespeople.
“He never usually invites anyone!” says my publisher. “Come on, let’s all go and have
supper!”
“It’s very kind of you, but I have a meeting I go to every Thursday.”
“When does it start?”
“In two hours’ time.”
“And where is it?”
“In an Armenian restaurant.”
My driver, who is himself Armenian, asks which one and says that it’s only fifteen
minutes from the place where we are going to eat. Everyone is doing their best to please
me: they think that the person I’m inviting to supper should be happy and pleased to be
so honored, that anything else can surely wait.
“What’s your name?” asks Marie.
“Mikhail.”
“Well, Mikhail,” and I see that Marie has understood everything, “why don’t you come
with us for an hour or so; the restaurant we’re going to is just around the corner. Then the
driver will take you wherever you want to go. If you prefer, though, we can cancel our
reservation and all go and have supper at the Armenian restaurant instead. That way,
you’d feel less anxious.”
I can’t stop looking at him. He isn’t particularly handsome or particularly ugly. He’s
neither tall nor short. He’s dressed in black, simple and elegant—and by elegance I mean
a complete absence of brand names or designer labels.
Marie links arms with Mikhail and heads for the exit. The bookseller still has a pile of
books waiting to be signed for readers who could not come to the signing, but I promise
that I will drop by the following day. My legs are trembling, my heart pounding, and yet I
have to pretend that everything is fine, that I’m glad the book signing was a success, that
I’m interested in what other people are saying. We cross the Champs-Elysées, the sun is
setting behind the Arc de Triomphe, and, for some reason, I know that this is a sign, a
good sign.
As long as I can keep control of the situation.
Why do I want to speak to him? The people from the publishing house keep talking to me
and I respond automatically; no one notices that I am far away, struggling to understand
why I have invited to supper someone whom I should, by rights, hate. Do I want to find
out where Esther is? Do I want to have my revenge on this young man, so lost, so
insecure, and yet who was capable of luring away the person I love? Do I want to prove
to myself that I am better, much better than he? Do I want to bribe him, seduce him,
make him persuade my wife to come back?
I can’t answer any of these questions, and that doesn’t matter. The only thing I have said
up until now is: “I’d like to invite this young man to supper.” I had imagined the scene so
often before: we meet, I grab him by the throat, punch him, humiliate him in front of
Esther; or I get a thrashing and make her see how hard I’m fighting for her, suffering for
her. I had imagined scenes of aggression or feigned indifference or public scandal, but the
words “I’d like to invite this young man to supper” had never once entered my head.
No need to ask what I will do next, all I have to do now is to keep an eye on Marie, who
is walking along a few paces ahead of me, holding on to Mikhail’s arm, as if she were his
girlfriend. She won’t let him go and yet I wonder, at the same time, why she’s helping
me, when she knows that a meeting with this young man could also mean that I’ll find
out where my wife is living.
We arrive. Mikhail makes a point of sitting far away from me; perhaps he wants to avoid
getting caught up in a conversation with me. Laughter, champagne, vodka, and caviar—I
glance at the menu and am horrified to see that the bookseller is spending about a
thousand dollars on the entrées alone. There is general chatter; Mikhail is asked what he
thought of the afternoon’s event; he says he enjoyed it; he is asked about the book; he
says he enjoyed it very much. Then he is forgotten, and attention turns to me—was I
happy with how things had gone, was the queue organized to my liking, had the security
team been up to scratch? My heart is still pounding, but I present a calm front. I thank
them for everything, for the efficient way in which the event was run.
Half an hour of conversation and a lot of vodka later, I can see that Mikhail is beginning
to relax. He isn’t the center of attention anymore, he doesn’t need to say very much, he
just has to endure it for a little while longer and then he can go. I know he wasn’t lying
about the Armenian restaurant, so at least now I have a clue. My wife must still be in
Paris! I must pretend to be friendly, try to win his confidence, the initial tensions have all
disappeared.
An hour passes. Mikhail looks at his watch and I can see that he is about to leave. I must
do something—now. Every time I look at him, I feel more and more insignificant and
understand less and less how Esther could have exchanged me for someone who seems so
unworldly (she mentioned that he had “magical” powers). However difficult it might be
to pretend that I feel perfectly at ease talking to someone who is my enemy, I must do
something.
“Let’s find out a bit more about our reader,” I say, and there is an immediate silence.
“Here he is, about to leave at any moment, and he’s hardly said a word about his life.
What do you do?”
Despite the number of vodkas he has drunk, Mikhail seems suddenly to recover his
sobriety.
“I organize meetings at the Armenian restaurant.”
“What does that involve?”
“I stand on stage and tell stories. And I let the people in the audience tell their stories
too.”
“I do the same thing in my books.”
“I know, that’s how I first met…”
He’s going to say who he is!
“Were you born here?” asks Marie, thus preventing him from finishing his sentence.
“I was born in the Kazakhstan steppes.”
Kazakhstan. Who’s going to be brave enough to ask where Kazakhstan is?
“Where’s Kazakhstan?” asks the sales representative.
Blessed are those who are not afraid to admit that they don’t know something.
“I was waiting for someone to ask that,” and there is an almost gleeful look in Mikhail’s
eyes now. “Whenever I say where I was born, about ten minutes later people are saying
that I’m from Pakistan or Afghanistan…. My country is in Central Asia. It has barely
fourteen million inhabitants in an area far larger than France with its population of sixty
million.”
“So it’s a place where no one can complain about the lack of space, then,” says my
publisher, laughing.
“It’s a place where, during the last century, no one had the right to complain about
anything, even if they wanted to. When the Communist regime abolished private
ownership, the livestock were simply abandoned and 48.6 percent of the population died.
Do you understand what that means? Nearly half the population of my country died of
hunger between 1932 and 1933.”
Silence falls. After all, tragedies get in the way of celebrations, and one of the people
present tries to change the subject. However, I insist that my “reader” tells us more about
his country.
“What are the steppes like?” I ask.
“They’re vast plains with barely any vegetation, as I’m sure you know.”
I do know, but it had been my turn to ask a question, to keep the conversation going.
“I’ve just remembered something about Kazakhstan,” says my publisher. “Some time
ago, I was sent a typescript by a writer who lives there, describing the atomic tests that
were carried out on the steppes.”
“Our country has blood in its soil and in its soul. Those tests changed what cannot be
changed, and we will be paying the price for many generations to come. We even made
an entire sea disappear.”
It is Marie’s turn to speak.
“No one can make a sea disappear.”
“I’m twenty-five years old, and that is all the time it took, just one generation, for the
water that had been there for millennia to be transformed into dust. Those in charge of the
Communist regime decided to divert two rivers, Amu Darya and Syr Darya, so that they
could irrigate some cotton plantations. They failed, but by then it was too late—the sea
had ceased to exist, and the cultivated land became a desert.
“The lack of water affected the whole climate. Nowadays, vast sandstorms scatter
150,000 tons of salt and dust every year. Fifty million people in five countries were
affected by the Soviet bureaucrats’ irresponsible—and irreversible—decision. The little
water that was left is polluted and is the source of all kinds of diseases.”
I made a mental note of what he was saying. It could be useful in one of my lectures.
Mikhail went on, and his tone of voice was no longer technical, but tragic.
“My grandfather says that the Aral Sea was once known as the Blue Sea, because of the
color of its waters. It no longer exists, and yet the people there refuse to leave their
houses and move somewhere else: they still dream of waves and fishes, they still have
their fishing rods and talk about boats and bait.”
“Is it true about the atomic tests, though?” asks my publisher.
“I think that everyone born in my country feels what the land felt, because every Kazakh
carries his land in his blood. For forty years, the plains were shaken by nuclear or
thermonuclear bombs, a total of 456 in 1989. Of those tests, 116 were carried out in the
open, which amounts to a bomb twenty-five hundred times more powerful than the one
that was dropped on Hiroshima during the Second World War. As a result, thousands of
people were contaminated by radioactivity and subsequently contracted lung cancer,
while thousands of children were born with motor deficiencies, missing limbs, or mental
problems.”
Mikhail looks at his watch.
“Now, if you don’t mind, I have to go.”
Half of those around the table are sorry, the conversation was just getting interesting. The
other half are glad: it’s absurd to talk about such tragic events on such a happy occasion.
Mikhail says goodbye to everyone with a nod of his head and gives me a hug, not
because he feels a particular affection for me, but so that he can whisper:
“As I said before, she’s fine. Don’t worry.”

Don’t worry,’ he says. Why should I worry about a woman who left me? It was
because of her that I was questioned by the police, splashed all over the front pages of the
scandal sheets; it was because of her that I spent all those painful days and nights, nearly
lost all my friends and…”
“…and wrote A Time to Rend and a Time to Sew. Come on, we’re both adults, with
plenty of life experience. Let’s not deceive ourselves. Of course, you’d like to know how
she is. In fact, I’d go further: you’d like to see her.”
“If you’re so sure about that, why did you help persuade him to come to supper with us?
Now I have a clue: he appears every Thursday at that Armenian restaurant.”
“I know. You’d better follow up on that.”
“Don’t you love me?”
“More than yesterday and less than tomorrow, as it says on those postcards you can buy
in stationery shops. Yes, of course, I love you. I’m hopelessly in love, if you must know.
I’m even considering changing my address and coming to live in this huge, empty
apartment of yours, but whenever I suggest it, you always change the subject.
Nevertheless, I forget my pride and try to explain what a big step it would be for us to
live together, and hear you say that it’s too soon for that; perhaps you’re afraid you’ll lose
me the way you lost Esther, or perhaps you’re still waiting for her to come back, or
perhaps you don’t want to lose your freedom, or are simultaneously afraid of being alone
and afraid of living with someone—in short, our relationship’s a complete disaster. But,
now that you ask, there’s my answer: I love you very much.”
“So why did you help?”
“Because I can’t live forever with the ghost of a woman who left without a word of
explanation. I’ve read your book. I believe that only by finding her and resolving the
matter will your heart ever truly be mine. That’s what happened with the neighbor I was
in love with. I was close enough to him to be able to see what a coward he was when it
came to our relationship, how he could never commit himself to the thing he wanted with
all his heart, but which he always felt was too dangerous to actually have. You’ve often
said that absolute freedom doesn’t exist; what does exist is the freedom to choose
anything you like and then commit yourself to that decision. The closer I was to my
neighbor, the more I admired you: a man who decided to go on loving the wife who had
abandoned him and who wanted nothing more to do with him. You not only decided to
do that, you made your decision public. This is what you say in your book; it’s a passage
I know by heart:
“‘When I had nothing more to lose, I was given everything. When I ceased to be who I
am, I found myself. When I experienced humiliation and yet kept on walking, I
understood that I was free to choose my destiny. Perhaps there’s something wrong with
me, I don’t know, perhaps my marriage was a dream I couldn’t understand while it lasted.
All I know is that even though I can live without her, I would still like to see her again, to
say what I never said when we were together: I love you more than I love myself. If I
could say that, then I could go on living, at peace with myself, because that love has
redeemed me.’”
“Mikhail told me that Esther had probably read my book. That’s enough.”
“Maybe, but for you to be able to love her fully, you need to find her and tell her that to
her face. It might not be possible, she might not want to see you, but you would, at least,
have tried. I would be free from the ‘ideal woman’ and you would be free from the
absolute presence of what you call the Zahir.”
“You’re very brave.”
“No, I’m not, I’m afraid. But I have no choice.”

The following morning, I swore to myself that I would not try to find out where
Esther was living. For two years, I had unconsciously preferred to believe that she had
been forced to leave, that she had been kidnapped or was being blackmailed by some
terrorist group. Now that I knew she was alive and well (that was what the young man
had told me), why try to see her again? My ex-wife had the right to look for happiness,
and I should respect her decision.
This idea lasted a little more than four hours; later in the afternoon, I went to a church, lit
a candle, and made another promise, this time a sacred, ritual promise: to try to find her.
Marie was right. I was too old to continue deceiving myself by pretending I didn’t care. I
respected her decision to leave, but the very person who had helped me build my life had
very nearly destroyed me. She had always been so brave. Why, this time, had she fled
like a thief in the night, without looking her husband in the eye and explaining why? We
were both old enough to act and face the consequences of our actions: my wife’s (or,
rather, my ex-wife’s) behavior was completely out of character, and I needed to know
why.

It was another week—an eternity—before the “performance” at the restaurant. In the next
few days, I agreed to do interviews that I would never normally accept; I wrote various
newspaper articles, practiced yoga and meditation, read a book about a Russian painter,
another about a crime committed in Nepal, wrote prefaces for two books and
recommendations for another four, something which publishers were always asking me to
do, and which I usually refused.
There was still an awful lot of time to kill, so I decided to pay off a few debts at the Favor
Bank—accepting supper invitations, giving brief talks at schools where the children of
friends were studying, visiting a golf club, doing an improvised book signing at a
bookshop on the Avenue de Suffren owned by a friend (he put an advertisement in the
window three days before and all of twenty people turned up). My secretary remarked
that I was obviously very happy, because she hadn’t seen me so active in ages; I said that
having a book on the bestseller list encouraged me to work even harder than I usually did.
There were two things I didn’t do that week. First, I didn’t read any unsolicited
typescripts: according to my lawyers, these should always be returned immediately to the
sender; otherwise, sooner or later I would run the risk of someone claiming that I had
plagiarized one of their stories. (I’ve never understood why people send me their
typescripts anyway—after all, I’m not a publisher.)
Second, I didn’t look in an atlas to find out where Kazakhstan was, even though I knew
that, in order to gain Mikhail’s trust, I should try to find out a bit more about where he
came from.

People are waiting patiently for someone to open the door that leads to the room at the
back of the restaurant. The place has none of the charm of bars in St-Germain-des-Prés,
no cups of coffee served with a small glass of water, no well-dressed, well-spoken
people. It has none of the elegance of theater foyers, none of the magic of other shows
being put on all over the city in small bistros, with the actors always trying their hardest,
in the hope that some famous impresario will be in the audience and will introduce
himself at the end of the show, tell them they’re wonderful, and invite them to appear at
some important arts center.
To be honest, I can’t understand why the place is so full: I’ve never seen it mentioned in
the magazines that specialize in listing entertainment and the arts in Paris.

While I’m waiting, I talk to the owner and learn that he is planning to turn the whole
restaurant area into a theater.
“More and more people come every week,” he says. “I agreed initially because a
journalist asked me as a favor and said that, in return, he’d publish a review of my
restaurant in his magazine. Besides, the room is rarely used on Thursdays, and while
people are waiting, they have a meal; in fact, I probably make more money on a Thursday
than I do on any other night of the week. The only thing that concerned me was that the
actors might belong to a sect. As you probably know, the laws here are very strict.”
Yes, I did know; certain people had even suggested that my books were linked to some
dangerous philosophical trend, to a strand of religious teaching that was out of step with
commonly accepted values. France, normally so liberal, was slightly paranoid about the
subject. There had been a recent long report about the “brainwashing” practiced on
certain unwary people. As if those same people were able to make all kinds of other
choices about school, university, toothpaste, cars, films, husbands, wives, lovers, but,
when it came to matters of faith, were easily manipulated.
“How do they advertise these events?” I ask.
“I’ve no idea. If I did, I’d use the same person to promote my restaurant.”
And just to clear up any doubts, since he doesn’t know who I am, he adds: “By the way,
it isn’t a sect. They really are just actors.”

The door to the room is opened, the people flock in, depositing five euros in a small
basket. Inside, standing impassive on the improvised stage, are two young men and two
young women, all wearing full, white skirts, stiffly starched to make them stand out. As
well as these four, there is an older man carrying a conga drum and a woman with a huge
bronze cymbal covered in small, tinkling attachments; every time she inadvertently
brushes against this instrument, it emits a sound like metallic rain.
Mikhail is one of the young men, although he looks completely different from the person
I met at the book signing: his eyes, fixed on some point in space, shine with a special
light.
The audience sits down on the chairs scattered around the room. Young men and women
dressed in such a way that if you met them on the street, you would think they were into
hard drugs. Middle-aged executives or civil servants with their wives. A few nine- or tenyear-old
children, possibly brought by their parents. A few older people, who must have
made a great effort to get here, since the nearest metro station is five blocks away.
They drink, smoke, talk loudly, as if the people on the stage did not exist. The volume of
conversation gradually increases; there is much laughter, it’s a real party atmosphere. A
sect? Only if it’s a confraternity of smokers. I glance anxiously about, thinking I can see
Esther in all the women there, sometimes even when they bear no physical resemblance
at all to my wife. (Why can’t I get used to saying “my ex-wife”?)
I ask a well-dressed woman what this is all about. She doesn’t seem to have the patience
to respond; she looks at me as if I were a novice, a person who needs to be educated in
the mysteries of life.
“Love stories,” she says. “Stories and energy.”
Stories and energy. Perhaps I had better not pursue the subject, although the woman
appears to be perfectly normal. I consider asking someone else, but decide that it’s best to
say nothing. I’ll find out soon enough for myself. A gentleman sitting by my side looks at
me and smiles:
“I’ve read your books and so, of course, I know why you’re here.”
I’m shocked. Does he know about the relationship between Mikhail and my wife—I must
again correct myself—the relationship between one of the people on stage and my exwife?

“An author like you would be bound to know about the Tengri. They’re intimately
connected with what you call ‘warriors of light.’”
“Of course,” I say, relieved.
And I think: I’ve never even heard of the Tengri.
Twenty minutes later, by which time the air in the room is thick with cigarette smoke, we
hear the sound of that cymbal. Miraculously, the conversations stop, the anarchic
atmosphere seems to take on a religious aura; audience and stage are equally silent; the
only sounds one can hear come from the restaurant next door.
Mikhail, who appears to be in a trance and is still gazing at some point in the distance,
begins:
“In the words of the Mongolian creation myth: ‘There came a wild dog who was blue and
gray and whose destiny was imposed on him by the heavens. His mate was a roe deer.’”
His voice sounds different, more feminine, more confident.
“Thus begins another love story. The wild dog with his courage and strength, the doe
with her gentleness, intuition, and elegance. Hunter and hunted meet and love each other.
According to the laws of nature, one should destroy the other, but in love there is neither
good nor evil, there is neither construction nor destruction, there is merely movement.
And love changes the laws of nature.”
He gestures with his hand and the four people on stage turn on the spot.
“In the steppes where I come from, the wild dog is seen as a feminine creature. Sensitive,
capable of hunting because he has honed his instincts, but timid too. He does not use
brute force, but strategy. Courageous, cautious, quick. He can change in a second from a
state of complete relaxation to the tension he needs to pounce on his prey.”
Accustomed as I am to writing stories, I think: “And what about the doe?” Mikhail is
equally used to telling stories and answers the question hanging in the air:
“The roe deer has the male attributes of speed and an understanding of the earth. The two
travel along together in their symbolic worlds, two impossibilities who have found each
other, and because they overcome their own natures and their barriers, they make the
world possible too. That is the Mongolian creation myth: out of two different natures love
is born. In contradiction, love grows in strength. In confrontation and transformation,
love is preserved.
“We have our life. It took the world a long time and much effort to get where it is, and we
organize ourselves as best we can; it isn’t ideal, but we get along. And yet there is
something missing, there is always something missing, and that is why we are gathered
here tonight, so that we can help each other to think a little about the reason for our
existence. Telling stories that make no sense, looking for facts that do not fit our usual
way of perceiving reality, so that, perhaps in one or two generations, we can discover
another way of living.
“As Dante wrote in The Divine Comedy, ‘The day that man allows true love to appear,
those things which are well made will fall into confusion and will overturn everything we
believe to be right and true.’ The world will become real when man learns how to love;
until then we will live in the belief that we know what love is, but we will always lack the
courage to confront it as it truly is.
“Love is an untamed force. When we try to control it, it destroys us. When we try to
imprison it, it enslaves us. When we try to understand it, it leaves us feeling lost and
confused.
“This force is on earth to make us happy, to bring us closer to God and to our neighbor,
and yet, given the way that we love now, we enjoy one hour of anxiety for every minute
of peace.”
Mikhail paused. The strange cymbal sounded again.
“As on every Thursday, we are not going to tell stories about love. We are going to tell
stories about the lack of love. We will see what lies on the surface—the layer where we
find all our customs and values—in order to understand what lies beneath. When we
penetrate beneath that layer we will find ourselves. Who would like to begin?”
Several people raised their hand. Mikhail pointed to a young woman of Arab appearance.
She turned to a man on his own, on the other side of the room.
“Have you ever failed to get an erection when you’ve been to bed with a woman?”
Everyone laughed. The man, however, avoided giving a direct answer.
“Are you asking that because your boyfriend is impotent?”
Again everyone laughed. While Mikhail had been speaking, I had once more begun to
suspect that this was indeed some new sect, but when sects hold meetings, I can’t
imagine that they smoke and drink and ask embarrassing questions about each other’s sex
lives.
“No, he’s not,” said the girl firmly. “But it has occasionally happened to him. And I know
that if you had taken my question seriously, your answer would have been ‘Yes, I have.’
All men, in all cultures and countries, independent of any feelings of love or sexual
attraction, have all experienced impotence at one time or another, often when they’re
with the person they most desire. It’s normal.”
Yes, it was normal, and the person who had told me this was a psychiatrist, to whom I
went when I thought I had a problem.
The girl went on:
“But the story we’re told is that all men can always get an erection. When he can’t, the
man feels useless, and the woman is convinced she isn’t attractive enough to arouse him.
Since it’s a taboo subject, he can’t talk to his friends about it. He tells the woman the old
lie: ‘It’s never happened to me before.’ He feels ashamed of himself and often runs away
from someone with whom he could have had a really good relationship, if only he had
allowed himself a second, third, or fourth chance. If he had trusted more in the love of his
friends, if he had told the truth, he would have found out that he wasn’t the only one. If
he had trusted more in the love of the woman, he would not have felt humiliated.”
Applause. Cigarettes are lit, as if a lot of the people there—men and women—feel a great
sense of relief.
Mikhail points to a man who looks like an executive in some big multinational.
“I’m a lawyer and I specialize in contested divorces.”
“What does that mean?” asks someone in the audience.
“It’s when one of the parties won’t agree to the separation,” replies the lawyer, irritated at
being interrupted and as if he found it absurd that anyone should not know the meaning
of such a straightforward legal term.
“Go on,” says Mikhail, with an authority that I would never have imagined in the young
man I had met at the book signing.
The lawyer continues:
“Today I received a report from the London-based firm Human and Legal Resources.
This is what it says:
(a) ‘Two-thirds of all employees in a company have some kind of love relationship.
Imagine! That means that in any office of three people, two will end up having some
form of intimate contact.
(b) ‘Ten percent leave their job because of this, 40 percent have relationships that last
more than three months, and in the case of certain professions that require people to
spend long periods away from home, at least eight out of ten end up having an affair.’
“Isn’t that unbelievable?”
“Well, of course, we have to bow down to statistics!” remarks one of a group of young
men who are all dressed as if they were members of some dangerous band of robbers.
“We all believe in statistics! That means that my mother must be being unfaithful to my
father, but it’s not her fault, it’s the fault of the statistics!”
More laughter, more cigarettes, more relief, as if the people in the audience were hearing
things they had always been afraid to hear and that hearing them freed them from some
kind of anxiety. I think about Esther and about Mikhail in “professions that require
people to spend long periods away from home…”
I think about myself and the many times this has happened to me. They are, after all,
statistics. We are not alone.
Other stories are told of jealousy, abandonment, depression, but I am no longer listening.
My Zahir has returned in its full intensity—even though, for a few moments, I had
believed I was merely engaging in a little group therapy, I am, in fact, in the same room
as the man who stole my wife. My neighbor, the one who recognized me, asks if I’m
enjoying myself. He distracts me for a moment from my Zahir, and I am happy to
respond.
“I still can’t quite see the point. It’s like a self-help group, like Alcoholics Anonymous or
marriage counseling.”
“But doesn’t what you hear strike you as genuine?”
“Possibly, but again, I can’t see the point.”
“This isn’t the most important part of the evening; it’s just a way of not feeling so alone.
By talking about our lives, we come to realize that most people have experienced the
same thing.”
“And what’s the practical result?”
“If we’re not alone, then we have more strength to find out where we went wrong and to
change direction. But, as I said, this is just an interval between what the young man says
at the beginning and the moment when we invoke the energy.”
“Who is the young man?”
Our conversation is interrupted by the sound of the cymbal. This time, it is the older man
with the conga drum who speaks.
“The time for reasoning is over. Let us move on now to the ritual, to the emotion that
crowns and transforms everything. For those of you who are here for the first time
tonight, this dance develops our capacity to accept love. Love is the only thing that
activates our intelligence and our creativity, that purifies and liberates us.”
The cigarettes are extinguished, the clink of glasses stops. That same strange silence
descends upon the room; one of the young women says a prayer:
“We will dance, Lady, in homage to you. May our dancing make us fly up to heaven.”
Did I hear right? Did she say “Lady”? She did.
The other young woman lights the candles in four candelabra; the other lights are
switched off. The four figures in white, with their starched white skirts, come down from
the stage and mingle with the audience. For nearly half an hour, the second young man,
with a voice that seems to emerge from his belly, intones a monotonous, repetitive song,
which, curiously, makes me forget the Zahir a little and slip into a kind of somnolence.
Even one of the children, who had kept running up and down during the “talking about
love” session, is now quiet and still, her eyes fixed on the stage. Some of those present
have their eyes closed, others are staring at the floor or at some invisible point in space,
as I had seen Mikhail do.
When he stops singing, the percussion—the cymbal and the drum—strike up a rhythm
familiar to me from religious ceremonies originating in Africa.
The white-clothed figures start to spin, and in that packed space, the audience makes
room so that the wide skirts can trace movements in the air. The instruments play faster,
the four spin ever faster too, emitting sounds that belong to no known language, as if they
were speaking directly with angels or with the Lady.
My neighbor gets to his feet and begins to dance too and to utter incomprehensible
words. Ten or twelve other people in the audience do the same, while the rest watch with
a mixture of reverence and amazement.

I don’t know how long the dance went on for, but the sound of the instruments seemed to
keep time with the beating of my heart, and I felt an enormous desire to surrender myself,
to say strange things, to move my body; it took a mixture of self-control and a sense of
the absurd to stop myself from spinning like a mad thing on the spot. Meanwhile, as
never before, the figure of Esther, my Zahir, seemed to hover before me, smiling, calling
on me to praise the Lady.
I struggled not to enter into that unknown ritual, wanting it all to end as quickly as
possible. I tried to concentrate on my main reason for being there that night—to talk to
Mikhail, to have him take me to my Zahir—but I found it impossible to remain still. I got
up from my chair and just as I was cautiously, shyly, taking my first steps, the music
abruptly stopped.
In the room lit only by the candles, all I could hear was the labored breathing of those
who had danced. Gradually, the sound faded, the lights were switched back on, and
everything seemed to have returned to normal. Glasses were again filled with beer, wine,
water, soft drinks; the children started running about and talking loudly, and soon
everyone was chatting as if nothing, absolutely nothing, had happened.
“It’s nearly time to close the meeting,” said the young woman who had lit the candles.
“Alma has one final story.”
Alma was the woman playing the cymbal. She spoke with the accent of someone who has
lived in the East.
“The master had a buffalo. The animal’s widespread horns made him think that if he
could manage to sit between them, it would be like sitting on a throne. One day, when the
animal was distracted, he climbed up between the horns and did just that. The buffalo,
however, immediately lumbered to its feet and threw him off. When his wife saw this,
she began to cry.
“‘Don’t cry,’ said the master, once he had recovered. ‘I may have suffered, but I also
realized my dream.’”
People started leaving. I asked my neighbor what he had felt.
“You should know. You write about it in your books.”
I didn’t know, but I had to pretend that I did.
“Maybe I do know, but I want to be sure.”
He looked at me, unconvinced, and clearly began to doubt that I really was the author he
thought he knew.
“I was in touch with the energy of the universe,” he replied. “God passed through my
soul.”
And he left, so as not to have to explain what he had said.
In the empty room there were now only the four actors, the two musicians, and myself.
The women went off to the ladies’ bathroom, presumably to change their clothes. The
men took off their white costumes right there in the room and donned their ordinary
clothes. They immediately began putting away the candelabra and the musical
instruments in two large cases.
The older man, who had played the drum during the ceremony, started counting the
money and putting it into six equal piles. I think it was only then that Mikhail noticed my
presence.
“I thought I’d see you here.”
“And I imagine you know the reason.”
“After I’ve let the divine energy pass through my body, I know the reason for everything.
I know the reason for love and for war. I know why a man searches for the woman he
loves.”
I again felt as if I were walking along a knife edge. If he knew that I was here because of
my Zahir, then he also knew that this was a threat to his relationship with Esther.
“May we talk, like two men of honor fighting for something worthwhile?”
Mikhail seemed to hesitate slightly. I went on:
“I know that I’ll emerge bruised and battered, like the master who wanted to sit between
the buffalo’s horns, but I deserve it. I deserve it because of the pain I inflicted, however
unconsciously. I don’t believe Esther would have left me if I had respected her love.”
“You understand nothing,” said Mikhail.
These words irritated me. How could a twenty-five-year-old tell an experienced man who
had suffered and been tested by life that he understood nothing? I had to control myself,
to humble myself, to do whatever was necessary. I could not go on living with ghosts, I
could not allow my whole universe to continue being dominated by the Zahir.
“Maybe I really don’t understand, but that’s precisely why I’m here—in order to
understand. To free myself by understanding what happened.”
“You understood everything quite clearly, and then suddenly stopped understanding; at
least that’s what Esther told me. As happens with all husbands, there came a point when
you started to treat your wife as if she were just part of the goods and chattel.”
I was tempted to say: “Why didn’t she tell me that herself? Why didn’t she give me a
chance to correct my mistakes and not leave me for a twenty-five-year-old who will only
end up treating her just as I did.” Some more cautious words emerged from my mouth
however.
“I don’t think that’s true. You’ve read my book, you came to my book signing because
you knew what I felt and wanted to reassure me. My heart is still in pieces: have you ever
heard of the Zahir?”
“I was brought up in the Islamic religion, so, yes, I’m familiar with the idea.”
“Well, Esther fills up every space in my life. I thought that by writing about my feelings,
I would free myself from her presence. Now I love her in a more silent way, but I can’t
think about anything else. I beg you, please, I’ll do anything you want, but I need you to
explain to me why she disappeared like that. As you yourself said, I understand nothing.”
It was very hard to stand there pleading with my wife’s lover to help me understand what
had happened. If Mikhail had not come to the book signing, perhaps that moment in the
cathedral in Vitória, where I acknowledged my love for her and out of which I wrote A
Time to Rend and a Time to Sew, would have been enough. Fate, however, had other
plans, and the mere possibility of being able to see my wife again had upset everything.
“Let’s have lunch together,” said Mikhail, after a long pause. “You really don’t
understand anything. But the divine energy that today passed through my body is
generous with you.”
We arranged to meet the next day. On the way home, I remembered a conversation I had
had with Esther three months before she disappeared.
A conversation about divine energy passing through the body.

Their eyes really are different. There’s the fear of death in them, of course, but
beyond that, there’s the idea of sacrifice. Their lives are meaningful because they are
ready to offer them up for a cause.”
“You’re talking about soldiers, are you?”
“Yes, and I’m talking as well about something I find terribly hard to accept, but which I
can’t pretend I don’t see. War is a ritual. A blood ritual, but also a love ritual.”
“You’re mad.”
“Maybe I am. But I’ve met other war correspondents, too, who go from one country to
the next, as if the routine of death were part of their lives. They’re not afraid of anything,
they face danger the way a soldier does. And all for a news report? I don’t think so. They
can no longer live without the danger, the adventure, the adrenaline in their blood. One of
them, a married man with three children, told me that the place where he feels most at
ease is in a war zone, even though he adores his family and talks all the time about his
wife and kids.”
“I just can’t understand it at all. Look, Esther, I don’t want to interfere in your life, but I
think this experience will end up doing you real harm.”
“It would harm me more to be living a life without meaning. In a war, everyone knows
they’re experiencing something important.”
“A historic moment, you mean?”
“No, that isn’t enough of a reason for risking your life. No, I mean that they’re
experiencing the true essence of man.”
“War?”
“No, love.”
“You’re becoming like them.”
“I think I am.”
“Tell your news agency you’ve had enough.”
“I can’t. It’s like a drug. As long as I’m in a war zone, my life has meaning. I go for days
without having a bath, I eat whatever the soldiers eat, I sleep three hours a night and
wake up to the sound of gunfire. I know that at any moment someone could lob a grenade
into the place where we’re sitting, and that makes me live, do you see? Really live, I
mean, loving every minute, every second. There’s no room for sadness, doubts, nothing;
there’s just a great love for life. Are you listening?”
“Absolutely.”
“It’s as if there was a divine light shining in the midst of every battle, in the midst of that
worst of all possible situations. Fear exists before and after, but not while the shots are
being fired, because, at that moment, you see men at their very limit, capable of the most
heroic of actions and the most inhumane. They run out under a hail of bullets to rescue a
comrade, and at the same time shoot anything that moves—children, women—anyone
who comes within their line of fire will die. People from small, provincial towns where
nothing ever happened and where they were always decent citizens find themselves
invading museums, destroying centuries-old works of art, and stealing things they don’t
need. They take photos of atrocities that they themselves committed and, rather than
trying to conceal these, they feel proud. And people who, before, were always disloyal
and treacherous feel a kind of camaraderie and solidarity and become incapable of doing
wrong. It’s a mad world, completely topsy-turvy.”
“Has it helped you answer the question that Hans asked Fritz in that bar in Tokyo in the
story you told me?”
“Yes, the answer lies in some words written by the Jesuit Teilhard de Chardin, the same
man who said that our world is surrounded by a layer of love. He said: ‘We can harness
the energy of the winds, the seas, the sun. But the day man learns to harness the energy of
love, that will be as important as the discovery of fire.’”
“And you could only learn that by going to a war zone?”
“I’m not sure, but it did allow me to see that, paradoxical though it may seem, people are
happy when they’re at war. For them, the world has meaning. As I said before, total
power or sacrificing themselves for a cause gives meaning to their lives. They are capable
of limitless love, because they no longer have anything to lose. A fatally wounded soldier
never asks the medical team: ‘Please save me!’ His last words are usually: ‘Tell my wife
and my son that I love them.’ At the last moment, they speak of love!”
“So, in your opinion, human beings only find life meaningful when they’re at war.”
“But we’re always at war. We’re at war with death, and we know that death will win in
the end. In armed conflicts, this is simply more obvious, but the same thing happens in
daily life. We can’t allow ourselves the luxury of being unhappy all the time.”
“What do you want me to do?”
“I need help. And that doesn’t mean saying to me, ‘Go and hand in your notice,’ because
that would only leave me feeling even more confused than before. We need to find a way
of channeling all this, of allowing the energy of this pure, absolute love to flow through
our bodies and spread around us. The only person so far who has helped me understand
this is a rather otherworldly interpreter who says he’s had revelations about this energy.”
“Are you talking about the love of God?”
“If someone is capable of loving his partner without restrictions, unconditionally, then he
is manifesting the love of God. If the love of God becomes manifest, he will love his
neighbor. If he loves his neighbor, he will love himself. If he loves himself, then
everything returns to its proper place. History changes.”
“History will never change because of politics or conquests or theories or wars; that’s
mere repetition, it’s been going on since the beginning of time. History will only change
when we are able to use the energy of love, just as we use the energy of the wind, the
seas, the atom.”
“Do you think we two could save the world?”
“I think there are more people out there who think the same way. Will you help me?”
“Yes, as long as you tell what I have to do.”
“But that’s precisely what I don’t know!”

I had been a regular customer at this charming pizzeria ever since my very first visit to
Paris, so much so that it has become part of my history. Most recently, I had held a
supper here to celebrate receiving the medal of Officer of Arts and Literature presented to
me by the Ministry of Culture, even though many people felt that the commemoration of
such an important event should have taken place somewhere more elegant and more
expensive. But Roberto, the owner, had become a kind of good-luck charm to me;
whenever I went to his restaurant, something good happened in my life.
“I could start with some small talk about the success of A Time to Rend and a Time to
Sew or the contradictory emotions I felt last night as I watched your performance.”
“It’s not a performance, it’s a meeting,” he said. “We tell stories and we dance in order to
feel the energy of love.”
“I could talk about anything just to put you at your ease, but we both know why we’re
here.”
“We’re here because of your wife,” said Mikhail, who was now full of a young man’s
defiance and in no way resembled the shy boy at the book signing or the spiritual leader
of that “meeting.”
“You mean my ex-wife. And I would like to ask you a favor: take me to her. I want her to
look me in the eye and tell me why she left. Only then will I be free of the Zahir.
Otherwise, I’ll go on thinking about her day and night, night and day, going over and
over our story, our history, again and again, trying to pinpoint the moment when I went
wrong and our paths began to diverge.”
He laughed.
“Reviewing history’s a great idea, that’s the only way you can make things change.”
“Very clever, but I’d prefer to leave philosophical discussions to one side for the
moment. I’m sure that, like all young men, you hold in your hands the precise formula for
putting the world to rights. However, like all young men, you will one day be as old as
me and then you’ll see that it’s not so easy to change things. But there’s no point talking
about that now. Can you grant me that favor?”
“I must first ask you something: Did she say goodbye?”
“No.”
“Did she say she was going away?”
“No, she didn’t. You know that.”
“Do you think that, given the kind of person Esther is, she would be capable of leaving a
man she had lived with for more than ten years without first confronting him and
explaining her reasons?”
“That’s precisely what I find most troubling. But what are you getting at?”
The conversation was interrupted by Roberto, who wanted to know if we were ready to
order. Mikhail asked for a Napolitana and I told Roberto to choose for me—this was
hardly the moment to be worrying about what I should eat. The only thing we needed
urgently was a bottle of red wine, as quickly as possible. When Roberto asked me what
sort of wine and I muttered an inaudible reply, he understood that he should simply leave
us alone and not ask me anything else during lunch, but take all the necessary decisions
himself, thus leaving me free to concentrate on my conversation with the young man
before me.
The wine arrived within thirty seconds. I filled our glasses.
“What’s she doing?”
“Do you really want to know?”
It irritated me to receive a question in response to mine.
“Yes, I do.”
“She’s making carpets and giving French lessons.”
Carpets! My wife (ex-wife, please, do try and get used to it), who had all the money she
could possibly need, had a degree in journalism, spoke four languages, was now obliged
to making a living weaving carpets and giving French lessons to foreigners? I must get a
grip on myself. I couldn’t risk wounding the young man’s male pride, even though I
thought it shameful that he couldn’t give Esther everything she deserved.
“Please, you must understand what I’ve been going through for the last year or more. I’m
no threat to your relationship with Esther. I just need a couple of hours with her, or one
hour, it doesn’t matter.”
Mikhail appeared to be savoring my words.
“You haven’t answered my question,” he said, with a smile. “Do you think that, given the
kind of person Esther is, she would leave the man of her life without at least saying
goodbye and without explaining why?”
“No, I don’t.”
“Then why all this stuff about ‘she left me’? Why do you say, ‘I’m no threat to your
relationship with Esther’?”
I was confused. I felt something like hope stirring inside me—not that I knew what I was
hoping for or where that hope had come from.
“Are you telling me that…”
“Exactly. I’m telling you that she hasn’t left you or me. She has just disappeared for a
while, possibly forever, but we must both respect that.”
It was as if a bright light were suddenly shining in that pizzeria, a place that had always
brought me good memories and good stories. I desperately wanted to believe what the
young man was saying; the Zahir was now pulsating all around me.
“Do you know where she is?”
“Yes, I do. But even though I miss her as much as you do, I must respect her silence. I
find this whole situation as confusing as you do. Esther may have found satisfaction in
the Love That Devours, she might be waiting for one of us to go and find her, she may
have met a new man, or she may have withdrawn from the world altogether. Whatever
the truth, if you do decide to go and find her, I can’t stop you. But, if you do, you must
know one thing: you must find not only her body, but also her soul.”
I felt like laughing. I felt like hugging him, or possibly killing him—my emotions
changed with startling speed.
“Did you and she…”
“Did we sleep together? That’s none of your business. I found in Esther the partner I was
looking for, the person who helped me set out on the mission I was entrusted with, the
angel who opened the doors, the roads, the paths that will allow us—if our Lady is
willing—to restore the energy of love to the earth. We share the same mission. And just
to put your mind at rest: I have a girlfriend, the blonde girl who was on stage with me last
night. Her name’s Lucrecia; she’s Italian.”
“Are you telling me the truth?”
“Yes, in the name of the Divine Energy, I am.”
He took a scrap of dark fabric out of his pocket.
“Do you see this? The cloth is actually green; it looks black because it’s caked with dried
blood. A soldier somewhere in the world asked her before he died to remove his shirt,
then cut it into tiny pieces and distribute those pieces to anyone capable of understanding
the message of his death. Do you have a piece?”
“No, Esther has never even mentioned it to me.”
“Whenever she meets someone whom she feels should receive the message, she also
gives them a little of the soldier’s blood.”
“And what is the message?”
“If she didn’t give you a piece of the shirt, I don’t think I can tell you; not, of course, that
she swore me to secrecy.”
“Do you know anyone else who has a piece of that cloth?”
“All the people who appear with me at the restaurant do. We’re only there because Esther
brought us together.”
I needed to tread carefully, to build up a relationship, to make a deposit in the Favor
Bank. I mustn’t frighten him or seem overeager; I should ask him about himself and his
work, about his country, of which he had spoken with such pride; I needed to find out if
what he was telling me was true or if he had some ulterior motive; I needed to be
absolutely sure that he was still in touch with Esther or if he had lost track of her as well.
He may have come from a remote country, where the values are different, but I knew that
the Favor Bank operated everywhere: it was an institution that knew no frontiers.
On the one hand, I wanted to believe everything he was saying. On the other, my heart
had suffered and bled enough during the thousand and one nights I had lain awake,
waiting for the sound of the key in the door, for Esther to come in and lie down beside
me, without saying a word. I had promised myself that if this ever happened, I would ask
her no questions. I would just kiss her and say, “Sleep well, my love,” and we would
wake the next day, hand in hand, as if this whole nightmare had never happened.
Roberto arrived with the pizzas. He seemed to be endowed with some kind of sixth sense
that told him when I needed time to think.
I looked at Mikhail again. Keep calm; if you don’t get your pulse rate under control,
you’ll have a heart attack. I drank a whole glass of wine and noticed that he had done the
same.
Why was he so nervous?
“Oh, I believe what you say. But we’ve got plenty of time to talk.”
“You’re going to ask me to take you to her.”
He had spoiled my game. I would have to start again.
“Yes, I am. I’m going to try to persuade you. I’m going to do everything in my power to
do just that. I’m in no hurry though; we’ve got a whole pizza to eat first. Besides, I want
to know more about you.”
I noticed that he was trying to keep his hands from trembling.
“I’m a person with a mission. I haven’t yet managed to fulfill it, but I think I still have
time to do so.”
“Perhaps I can help you.”
“Oh, you can. Anyone can; you just have to help spread the energy of love throughout the
world.”
“I can do more than that.”
I didn’t want to go any further; I didn’t want it to look as if I were trying to buy his
loyalty. Careful. I had to be very careful. He could be telling the truth, but he could also
be lying, trying to take advantage of my suffering.
“I only know of one kind of loving energy,” I went on. “The one I feel for the woman
who left, or, rather, went away and who is waiting for me. If I could see her again, I
would be a happy man. And the world would be a better place because one soul would be
content.”
He glanced up at the ceiling and back down at the table, and I allowed the silence to last
as long as possible.
“I can hear a voice,” he said at last, unable to look at me.
The great advantage of writing about spirituality is that I know I’m bound to keep
encountering people with some kind of gift. Some of those gifts are real, others are
fraudulent, some of those people are trying to use me, others are merely testing me out. I
have seen so many amazing things that I no longer have the slightest doubt that miracles
can happen, that everything is possible, and that people are beginning to relearn the inner
powers they long ago forgot.
However, this was not the ideal moment to speak of such matters. I was only interested in
the Zahir. I needed the Zahir to become Esther again.
“Mikhail…”
“Mikhail isn’t my real name. My real name is Oleg.”
“Oleg, then…”
“Mikhail is the name I chose when I decided to be reborn to life. Like the warrior
archangel, with his fiery sword, opening up a path so that—what is it you call them?—so
that the ‘warriors of light’ can find each other. That is my mission.”
“It’s my mission too.”
“Wouldn’t you rather talk about Esther?”
What? Was he changing the subject again back to the very thing that interested me?
“I’m not feeling very well.” His gaze was starting to wander; he kept glancing around the
restaurant as if I were not there. “I don’t want to talk about that. The voice…”
Something strange, something very strange, was happening. How far was he prepared to
go in order to impress me? Would he end up asking me to write a book about his life and
powers, like so many others had before him?
Whenever I have a clear objective, I will do anything to achieve it; that, after all, was
what I said in my books and I could hardly betray my own words. I had an objective now:
to gaze once more into the eyes of the Zahir. Mikhail had given me a lot of new
information: He wasn’t her lover, Esther hadn’t left me, it was just a matter of time
before I could bring her back. There was also the possibility that this meeting in the
pizzeria was all a farce, that he was just someone with no other means of earning a living
than by exploiting someone else’s pain in order to achieve his own ends.
I drank another glass of wine; Mikhail did the same.
Take care, my instinct was telling me.
“Yes, I do want to talk about Esther, but I want to know more about you too.”
“That’s not true. You’re just trying to seduce me, to persuade me to do things I was
perfectly prepared to do anyway. Your pain is preventing you from seeing things clearly;
you think I could be lying, that I’m trying to take advantage of the situation.”
Mikhail might know exactly what I was thinking, but he was speaking more loudly than
good manners permit. People were starting to turn around to see what was going on.
“You’re just trying to impress me; you don’t realize what an impact your books had on
my life or how much I learned from them. Your pain has made you blind, mean-spirited,
and obsessed with the Zahir. It isn’t your love for her that made me accept your invitation
to have lunch; in fact, I’m not sure I’m entirely convinced of your love; it might just be
wounded pride. The reason I’m here…”
His voice was growing louder; he was still glancing wildly around, as if he were losing
control.
“The lights…”
“What’s wrong?”
“The reason I’m here is her love for you!”
“Are you all right?”
Roberto had noticed that something was wrong. He came over to the table, smiling, and
put his hand casually on Mikhail’s shoulder.
“Well, the pizza was obviously pretty terrible. No need to pay, you can leave when you
like.”
That was the way out we needed. We could simply get up and go, thus avoiding the
depressing spectacle of someone in a pizzeria pretending to be communing with the spirit
world just to impress or embarrass me, although I did feel that this was more than just a
theatrical performance.
“Can you feel the wind blowing?”
At that moment, I was sure he wasn’t acting; on the contrary, he was making an
enormous effort to control himself and was more frightened by what was happening than
I was.
“The lights, the lights are starting to appear! Please, get me out of here!”
His body began to be shaken by tremors. There was now no hiding what was going on;
the people at the other tables had got up.
“In Kazakh…”
He did not manage to finish the sentence. He pushed the table away from him; pizzas,
glasses, and cutlery went flying, hitting the diners on the next table. His expression had
changed completely. His whole body was shaking and only the whites of his eyes were
now visible. His head was violently thrown back and I heard the sound of bones cracking.
A gentleman from one of the other tables leapt to his feet. Roberto caught Mikhail before
he fell, while the other man picked up a spoon from the floor and placed it in Mikhail’s
mouth.
The whole thing can only have lasted a matter of seconds, but to me it seemed like an
eternity. I could imagine the tabloids describing how a famous writer—and, despite all
the adverse reviews, a possible candidate for a major literary prize—had concocted some
sort of séance in a pizzeria just to get publicity for his new book. My paranoia was racing
out of control. They would find out that the medium in question was the same man who
had run off with my wife. It would all start again, and this time I wouldn’t have the
necessary courage or energy to face the same test.
I knew a few of the other diners, but which of them were really my friends? Who would
be capable of remaining silent about what they were seeing?
Mikhail’s body stopped shaking and relaxed; Roberto was holding him upright in his
chair. The other man took Mikhail’s pulse, examined his eyes, and then turned to me:
“It’s obviously not the first time this has happened. How long have you known him?”
“Oh, they’re regular customers,” replied Roberto, seeing that I had become incapable of
speech. “But this is the first time it’s happened in public, although, of course, I’ve had
other such cases in my restaurant before.”
“Yes,” said the man. “I noticed that you didn’t panic.”
The remark was clearly aimed at me, for I must have looked deathly pale. The man went
back to his table and Roberto tried to reassure me:
“He’s the personal physician of a very famous actress,” he said. “Although it looks to me
as if you’re more in need of medical attention than your guest here.”
Mikhail—or Oleg or whatever the name was of the young man sitting opposite me—was
beginning to come to. He looked around him and, far from seeming embarrassed, he
merely smiled rather shyly.
“I’m sorry,” he said. “I did try to control it.”
I was doing my best to remain calm. Roberto again came to my rescue.
“Don’t worry. Our writer here has enough money to pay for the broken plates.”
Then he turned to me: “Epilepsy. It was just an epileptic fit, that’s all.”
I left the restaurant with Mikhail, who immediately hailed a taxi.
“But we haven’t talked yet! Where are you going?”
“I’m in no state to talk now. And you know where to find me.”

There are two kinds of world: the one we dream about and the real one.
In my dream world, Mikhail had told the truth: I was just going through a difficult patch,
experiencing the kind of misunderstanding that can occur in any love relationship. Esther
was somewhere, waiting patiently for me to discover what had gone wrong in our
marriage and then to go to her and ask her forgiveness so that we could resume our life
together.
In that dream world, Mikhail and I talked calmly, left the pizzeria, took a taxi, rang the
doorbell of a house where my ex-wife (or my wife? The question now formulated itself
the other way around) wove carpets in the morning, gave French lessons in the afternoon,
and slept alone at night, waiting, like me, for the bell to ring, for her husband to enter
bearing a large bouquet of flowers and carry her off to drink hot chocolate in a hotel near
the Champs-Elysées.
In the real world, any meeting with Mikhail would always be tense, because I feared a
recurrence of what had happened at the pizzeria. Everything he had said was just the
product of his imagination; he had no more idea where Esther was than I did. In the real
world, I was at the Gare de l’Est at 11:45 in the morning, waiting for the Strasbourg train
to arrive, bringing with it an important American actor and director who very much
wanted to produce a film based on one of my books.
Up until then, whenever anyone had mentioned the possibility of making a film
adaptation, my answer had always been, “No, I’m not interested.” I believe that each
reader creates his own film inside his head, gives faces to the characters, constructs every
scene, hears the voices, smells the smells. And that is why, whenever a reader goes to see
a film based on a novel that he likes, he leaves feeling disappointed, saying: “The book is
so much better than the film.”
This time, my agent had been more insistent. She told me that this actor-filmmaker was
very much “on our side,” and was hoping to do something entirely different from any of
the other proposals we had received. The meeting had been arranged two months earlier,
and we were to have supper that night to discuss details and see if we really were
thinking along the same lines.
In the last two weeks, however, my diary had changed completely: it was Thursday, and I
needed to go to the Armenian restaurant, to try to reestablish contact with the young
epileptic who swore that he could hear voices, but who was nevertheless the only person
who knew where to find the Zahir. I interpreted this as a sign not to sell the film rights of
the book and so tried to cancel the meeting with the actor; he insisted and said that it
didn’t matter in the least; we could have lunch instead the following day: “No one could
possibly feel sad about having to spend a night in Paris alone,” he said, leaving me with
no possible comeback.
In the world of my imagination, Esther was still my companion, and her love gave me the
strength to go forward and explore all my frontiers.
In the real world, she was pure obsession, sapping my energy, taking up all the available
space, and obliging me to make an enormous effort just to continue with my life, my
work, my meetings with film producers, my interviews.
How was it possible that, even after two years, I had still not managed to forget her? I
could not bear having to think about it anymore, analyzing all the possibilities, and trying
various ways out: deciding simply to accept the situation, writing a book, practicing yoga,
doing some charity work, seeing friends, seducing women, going out to supper, to the
cinema (always avoiding adaptations of books, of course, and seeking out films that had
been specially written for the screen), to the theater, the ballet, to soccer games. The
Zahir always won, though; it was always there, making me think, “I wish she was here
with me.”
I looked at the station clock—fifteen minutes to go. In the world of my imagination,
Mikhail was an ally. In the real world, I had no concrete proof of this, apart from my
great desire to believe what he was saying; he could well be an enemy in disguise.
I returned to the usual questions: Why had she said nothing to me? Or had she been
trying to do just that when she asked me the question that Hans had asked? Had Esther
decided to save the world, as she had hinted in our conversation about love and war, and
was she preparing me to join her on this mission?
My eyes were fixed on the railway tracks. Esther and I, walking along parallel to each
other, never touching. Two destinies that…
Railway tracks.
How far apart were they?
In order to forget about the Zahir, I tried asking one of the platform staff.
“They’re 143.5 centimeters, or 4 feet 8½ inches, apart,” he replied.
He seemed to be a man at peace with life, proud of his job; he didn’t fit Esther’s
stereotype at all, that we all harbor a great sadness in our soul.
But his answer didn’t make any sense at all: 143.5 centimeters or 4 feet 8½ inches?
Absurd. Logically, it should be either 150 centimeters or 5 feet. A round number, easy for
builders of carriages and railway employees to remember.
“But why?” I asked the man.
“Because that’s the width between the wheels on the carriages.”
“But surely the wheels are that distance apart because the tracks are.”
“Look, just because I work in a railway station doesn’t mean I know everything about
trains. That’s just the way things are.”
He was no longer a happy person, at peace with his work; he could answer one question,
but could go no further. I apologized and spent what remained of the fifteen minutes
staring at the tracks, feeling intuitively that they were trying to tell me something.
Strange though it may seem, the tracks seemed to be saying something about my
marriage, and about all marriages.
The actor arrived, and he was far nicer than I expected, despite being so famous. I left
him at my favorite hotel and went home. To my surprise, Marie was there waiting for me,
saying that, due to adverse weather conditions, filming had been put off until the
following week.

I assume that, since today is Thursday, you’ll be going to the restaurant.”
“Do you want to come too?”
“Yes, I do. Why? Would you prefer to go alone?”
“Yes, I would.”
“Well, I’ve decided to come anyway. The man hasn’t yet been born who can tell me
where I can and cannot go.”
“Do you know why all railway tracks are 143.5 centimeters apart?”
“I can try and find out on the Internet. Is it important?”
“Very.”
“Leaving railway tracks to one side for the moment, I was talking to some friends of
mine who are fans of your books. They think that anyone who can write books like A
Time to Rend and a Time to Sew, or the one about the shepherd or the pilgimage to
Santiago, must be some kind of sage who has an answer for everything.”
“Which is not quite true, as you know.”
“What is the truth, then? How is it that you can pass on to your readers things that are
beyond your own knowledge?”
“They’re not beyond my knowledge. Everything that’s written in my books is part of my
soul, part of the lessons I’ve learned throughout my life, and which I try to apply to
myself. I’m a reader of my own books. They show me things that I already knew, even if
only unconsciously.”
“What about the reader?”
“I think it’s the same for the reader. A book—and we could be talking about anything
here, a film, a piece of music, a garden, the view of a mountain—reveals something.
‘Reveal’ means both to unveil and to reveil. Removing the veil from something that
already exists is different from me trying to teach others the secret of how to live a better
life.
“Love is giving me a pretty hard time at the moment, as you know. Now this could be
seen as a descent into hell or it could be seen as a revelation. It was only when I wrote A
Time to Rend and a Time to Sew that I understood my own capacity for love. And I
learned this while I was actually typing the words and sentences.”
“But what about the spiritual side? What about the spirituality that appears to be present
on every page of your books?”
“I’m beginning to like the idea of you coming with me to the Armenian restaurant,
because you’ll learn—or, rather, become conscious of—three important things. First, that
as soon as people decide to confront a problem, they realize that they are far more
capable than they thought they were. Second, that all energy and all knowledge come
from the same unknown source, which we usually call God. What I’ve tried to do in my
life, ever since I first started out on what I believe to be my path, is to honor that energy,
to connect up with it every day, to allow myself to be guided by the signs, to learn by
doing and not by thinking about doing.
“Third, that no one is alone in their troubles; there is always someone else thinking,
rejoicing, or suffering in the same way, and that gives us the strength to confront the
challenge before us.”
“Does that include suffering for love?”
“It includes everything. If there is suffering, then it’s best to accept it, because it won’t go
away just because you pretend it’s not there. If there is joy, then it’s best to accept that
too, even though you’re afraid it might end one day. Some people can only relate to life
through sacrifice and renunciation. Some people can only feel part of humanity when
they think they are ‘happy.’ But why all these questions?”
“Because I’m in love and I’m afraid of suffering.”
“Don’t be afraid; the only way to avoid that suffering would be to refuse to love.”
“I can feel Esther’s presence. Apart from the young man’s epileptic fit, you haven’t told
me anything else about what happened at the pizzeria. That’s a bad sign for me, although
it might be a good sign for you.”
“It might be a bad sign for me too.”
“Do you know what I would like to know? I’d like to know if you love me as much as I
love you. But I don’t have the courage to ask. Why do I have such frustrating
relationships with men? I always feel like I have to be in a relationship and that means I
have to be this fantastic, intelligent, sensitive, exceptional person. The effort of seduction
forces me to give of my best and that helps me. Besides, it’s really hard living on your
own, and I don’t know if that’s the best option either.”
“So you want to know if I’m still capable of loving a woman, even though she left me
without a word of explanation.”
“I read your book. I know you are.”
“You want to know whether, despite loving Esther, I’m still capable of loving you?”
“I wouldn’t dare ask that question because the answer could ruin my life.”
“You want to know if the heart of a man or a woman can contain enough love for more
than one person?”
“Since that’s a less direct question than the previous one, yes, I’d like an answer.”
“I think it’s perfectly possible as long as one of those people doesn’t turn into…”
“…a Zahir. Well, I’m going to fight for you anyway, because I think you’re worth it. Any
man capable of loving a woman as much as you loved—or love—Esther deserves all my
respect and all my efforts. And to show that I want to keep you by my side, to show how
important you are in my life, I’m going to do as you ask, however absurd it might be: I’m
going to find out why railway tracks are always 4 feet 8½ inches apart.”

The owner of the Armenian restaurant had done exactly what he had told me he was
planning to do: the whole restaurant, and not just the room at the back, was now full of
people who had come for the meeting. Marie eyed them with some curiosity and
occasionally commented on what a varied crowd they were.
“Why bring children to something like this? It’s absurd.”
“Perhaps they haven’t got anyone they can leave them with.”
At nine o’clock on the dot, the six performers—the two musicians in oriental dress and
the four young people in their white shirts and full skirts—walked onto the stage. Service
at the tables came to an immediate halt, and the people in the audience fell silent.
“In the Mongolian creation myth, doe and wild dog come together,” said Mikhail in that
voice which was not his own. “Two beings with very different natures: in the wild, the
dog would normally kill the deer for food. In the Mongolian myth, they both understand
that they each need the qualities of the other if they are to survive in a hostile world, and
that they should, therefore, join forces.
“To do this, they must first learn to love. And in order to love, they must cease to be who
they are, otherwise they will never be able to live together. With the passing of time, the
wild dog comes to accept that his instinct, always focused on the struggle to survive, now
serves a greater purpose: finding someone with whom he can rebuild the world.”
He paused.
“When we dance, we spin around that same Energy, which rises up to our Lady and
returns to us imbued with all her strength, just as the water in rivers evaporates, is
transformed into clouds, and returns in the form of rain. My story today is about the circle
of love.
“One morning, a farmer knocked loudly on the door of a monastery. When Brother Porter
opened the door, the farmer held out to him a magnificent bunch of grapes.
“‘Dear Brother Porter, these are the finest grapes from my vineyard. Please accept them
as a gift from me.’
“‘Why, thank you! I’ll take them straight to the Abbot, who will be thrilled with such a
gift.’
“‘No, no. I brought them for you.’
“‘For me? But I don’t deserve such a beautiful gift from nature.’
“‘Whenever I knocked on the door, you opened it. When the harvest had been ruined by
drought, you gave me a piece of bread and a glass of wine every day. I want this bunch of
grapes to bring you a little of the sun’s love, the rain’s beauty, and God’s miraculous
power.’
“Brother Porter put the grapes down where he could see them and spent the whole
morning admiring them: they really were lovely. Because of this, he decided to give the
present to the Abbot, whose words of wisdom had always been such a boon to him.
“The Abbot was very pleased with the grapes, but then he remembered that one of the
other monks was ill and thought: ‘I’ll give him the grapes. Who knows, they might bring
a little joy into his life.’
“But the grapes did not remain for very long in the room of the ailing monk, for he in turn
thought: ‘Brother Cook has taken such good care of me, giving me only the very best
food to eat. I’m sure these grapes will bring him great happiness.’ And when Brother
Cook brought him his lunch, the monk gave him the grapes.
“‘These are for you. You are in close touch with the gifts nature gives us and will know
what to do with this, God’s produce.’
“Brother Cook was amazed at the beauty of the grapes and drew his assistant’s attention
to their perfection. They were so perfect that no one could possibly appreciate them more
than Brother Sacristan, who had charge of the Holy Sacrament, and whom many in the
monastery considered to be a truly saintly man.
“Brother Sacristan, in turn, gave the grapes to the youngest of the novices in order to help
him understand that God’s work is to be found in the smallest details of the Creation.
When the novice received them, his heart was filled with the Glory of God, because he
had never before seen such a beautiful bunch of grapes. At the same time, he remembered
the day he had arrived at the monastery and the person who had opened the door to him;
that gesture of opening the door had allowed him to be there now in that community of
people who knew the value of miracles.
“Shortly before dark, he took the bunch of grapes to Brother Porter.
“‘Eat and enjoy. You spend most of your time here all alone, and these grapes will do
you good.’
“Brother Porter understood then that the gift really was intended for him; he savored
every grape and went to sleep a happy man. In this way, the circle was closed; the circle
of happiness and joy which always wraps around those who are in contact with the
energy of love.”
The woman called Alma sounded the cymbal.
“As we do every Thursday, we listen to a story of love and tell stories about the lack of
love. Let us look at what is on the surface and then, little by little, we will understand
what lies beneath: our habits, our values. And when we can penetrate that layer, we will
be able to find ourselves. Who would like to begin?”
Several hands went up, including—to Marie’s surprise—mine. The noise started up
again; people shifted in their seats. Mikhail pointed to a tall, pretty woman with blue
eyes.
“Last week, I went to see a male friend of mine who lives alone in the mountains, near
the border with Spain; he loves the good things of life and has often said that any wisdom
he may have acquired comes from the fact that he lives each moment to the fullest. Now,
right from the start, my husband was against my going to see this friend. He knows what
he’s like, that his favorite pastimes are shooting birds and seducing women. But I needed
to talk to this friend; I was going through a difficult time and only he could help me. My
husband suggested I see a psychiatrist or go on a trip; we even had a row about it, but
despite all these domestic pressures, I set off. My friend came to meet me at the airport
and we spent the afternoon talking; we ate supper, drank some wine, talked a bit more
and then I went to bed. When I woke up the next morning, we went for a walk near where
he lives and he dropped me back at the airport.
“As soon as I got home, the questions began. Was he alone? Yes. You mean he didn’t
have a girlfriend with him? No, he didn’t. Did you have anything to drink? Yes, I did.
Why don’t you want to talk about it? But I am talking about it! Alone together in a house
in the mountains, eh? Very romantic. So? And all you did was talk, you say? Yes, that’s
all. And you expect me to believe that? Why shouldn’t you believe it? Because it goes
against human nature—if a man and a woman get together, have a bit to drink, and talk
about personal things, they’re bound to end up in bed!
“I agree with my husband. It does go against everything we’re taught. He’ll never believe
the story I’ve just told, but it’s absolutely true. Since then, our life has become a little
hell. It will pass, but going through all this pain is pointless, and all because we’ve been
told that if a man and a woman like each other and circumstances allow, they’re bound to
end up in bed together.”
Applause. Cigarettes were lit. The clink of glasses and bottles.
“What’s going on?” whispered Marie. “Group therapy for couples?”
“It’s all part of the meeting. No one says whether it’s right or wrong, they just tell
stories.”
“But why do they do it in public, in this irreverent way, with people drinking and
smoking?”
“Perhaps it’s to stop things from getting too heavy. That way it’s easier. And if it helps to
make things easier, what’s wrong with that?”
“Easier? Talking to a load of strangers who might go and repeat this story to her husband
tomorrow?”
Someone else had started talking, and so I wasn’t able to tell Marie that it didn’t matter:
everyone was there to talk about the lack of love disguised as love.
“I’m the husband of the woman who just told that story,” said a man, who must have
been at least twenty years older than the pretty, young blonde woman. “Everything she
said is true, but there’s something she doesn’t know and which I haven’t had the courage
to tell her. I’ll do so now.
“When she went off to the mountains, I couldn’t sleep all night, and I started imagining,
in detail, what was going on. When she arrives, the fire is already lit; she takes off her
coat, takes off her sweater; she’s not wearing a bra under her thin T-shirt. He can clearly
see the shape of her breasts.
“She pretends not to notice him looking at her. She says she’s going to the kitchen to get
another bottle of champagne. She’s wearing very tight jeans, she walks slowly, and she
doesn’t need to turn around to know that he’s watching her every move. She comes back,
they talk about very personal things, which makes them feel even closer.
“They finish talking about the problem that took her there. Her cell phone rings; it’s me,
wanting to know if she’s all right. She goes over to him, puts the phone to his ear, and
they both listen to what I have to say; it’s an awkward conversation, because I know it’s
too late to put any kind of pressure on her, it’s best just to pretend that everything’s fine
and tell her to enjoy her time in the mountains, because the following day she’ll be back
in Paris, taking care of the kids and doing the shopping.
“I hang up, knowing that he has heard the whole conversation. The two of them—
because, before, they were sitting on separate sofas—are now very close indeed.
“At that point, I stopped thinking about what was happening in the mountains. I got up,
went into my children’s bedroom, walked over to the window, and looked out over Paris,
and do you know what I felt? I felt excited, very, very excited; the thought of the two of
them together, knowing that my wife could, at that very moment, be kissing another man,
making love with him, had aroused me sexually.
“I felt awful. How could I possibly get excited over something like that? The next day, I
talked to two friends; obviously, I didn’t use myself as an example, but I asked them if
they had ever felt aroused when they caught another man staring at their wife’s cleavage.
They didn’t really answer the question because it’s such a taboo. But they both agreed
that it’s always nice to know that your wife is desired by another man, although they
wouldn’t go any further than that. Is this a secret fantasy hidden in the hearts of all men?
I don’t know. This last week has been a little hell for both of us simply because I didn’t
understand my own feelings. And because I can’t understand them, I blame her for
provoking in me feelings that make my world seem suddenly unsafe.”
This time a lot of cigarettes were lit, but there was no applause. It was as if, even there,
the subject continued to be a taboo.
I put up my hand again, and meanwhile asked myself if I agreed with what the man had
just said. Yes, I did. I had imagined similar scenarios involving Esther and the soldiers
she met in war zones, but I had never dared say as much, not even to myself.
Mikhail looked in my direction and nodded.
I don’t know how I managed to get to my feet and look at that audience, who were still
visibly shocked by the story of the man who had felt aroused by the thought of his wife
having sex with another man. No one seemed to be listening, and that helped me make a
start.
“I apologize for not being as direct as the two previous speakers, but I nevertheless have
something to say. I went to a train station today and learned that the distance between
railway tracks is always 143.5 centimeters, or 4 feet 8½ inches. Why this absurd
measurement? I asked my girlfriend to find out and this is what she discovered. When
they built the first train carriages, they used the same tools as they had for building horsedrawn
carriages. And why that distance between the wheels on carriages? Because that
was the width of the old roads along which the carriages had to travel. And who decided
that roads should be that width? Well, suddenly, we are plunged back into the distant
past. It was the Romans, the first great road builders, who decided to make their roads
that width. And why? Because their war chariots were pulled by two horses, and when
placed side by side, the horses they used at the time took up 143.5 centimeters.
“So the distance between the tracks I saw today, used by our state-of-the-art high-speed
trains, was determined by the Romans. When people went to the United States and started
building railways there, it didn’t occur to them to change the width and so it stayed as it
was. This even affected the building of space shuttles. American engineers thought the
fuel tanks should be wider, but the tanks were built in Utah and had to be transported by
train to the Space Center in Florida, and the tunnels couldn’t take anything wider. And so
they had to accept the measurement that the Romans had decided was the ideal. But what
has all this to do with marriage?”
I paused. Some people were not in the slightest bit interested in railway tracks and had
started talking among themselves. Others were listening attentively, among them Marie
and Mikhail.
“It has everything to do with marriage and with the two stories we have just heard. At
some point in history, someone turned up and said: When two people get married, they
must stay frozen like that for the rest of their lives. You will move along side by side like
two tracks, keeping always that same distance apart. Even if sometimes one of you needs
to be a little farther away or a little closer, that is against the rules. The rules say: Be
sensible, think of the future, think of your children. You can’t change, you must be like
two railway tracks that remain the same distance apart all the way from their point of
departure to their destination. The rules don’t allow for love to change, or to grow at the
start and diminish halfway through—it’s too dangerous. And so, after the enthusiasm of
the first few years, they maintain the same distance, the same solidity, the same
functional nature. Your purpose is to allow the train bearing the survival of the species to
head off into the future: your children will only be happy if you stay just as you were—
143.5 centimeters apart. If you’re not happy with something that never changes, think of
them, think of the children you brought into the world.
“Think of your neighbors. Show them that you’re happy, eat roast beef on Sundays,
watch television, help the community. Think of society. Dress in such a way that
everyone knows you’re in perfect harmony. Never glance to the side, someone might be
watching you, and that could bring temptation; it could mean divorce, crisis, depression.
“Smile in all the photos. Put the photos in the living room, so that everyone can see them.
Cut the grass, practice a sport—oh, yes, you must practice a sport in order to stay frozen
in time. When sport isn’t enough, have plastic surgery. But never forget, these rules were
established long ago and must be respected. Who established these rules? That doesn’t
matter. Don’t question them, because they will always apply, even if you don’t agree
with them.”
I sat down. There was a mixture of enthusiastic applause and indifference, and I
wondered if I had gone too far. Marie was looking at me with a mixture of admiration
and surprise.
The woman on stage sounded the cymbal.
I told Marie to stay where she was, while I went outside to smoke a cigarette:
“They’ll perform a dance now in the name of love, in the name of the Lady.”
“You can smoke in here, can’t you?”
“Yes, but I need to be alone.”

It may have been early spring, but it was still very cold; nevertheless, I was in need of
some fresh air. Why had I told that story? My marriage to Esther had never been the way
I described: two railway tracks, always beside each other, always forming two correct,
straight lines, We had had our ups and downs; one or other of us had occasionally
threatened to leave for good; and yet we continued on together.
Until two years ago.
Or until the moment when she began to want to know why she was unhappy.
No one should ever ask themselves that: Why am I unhappy? The question carries within
it the virus that will destroy everything. If we ask that question, it means we want to find
out what makes us happy. If what makes us happy is different from what we have now,
then we must either change once and for all or stay as we are, feeling even more
unhappy.
I now found myself in precisely that situation: I had a lively, interesting girlfriend, my
work was going well, and there was every chance that, in the fullness of time, things
would sort themselves out. I should resign myself to the situation. I should accept what
life was offering me, not follow Esther’s example, not look at anyone else, but remember
Marie’s words, and build a new life with her.
No, I can’t think like that. If I behave in the way people expect me to behave, I will
become their slave. It requires enormous self-control not to succumb, because our natural
tendency is to want to please, even if the person to be pleased is us. If I do that, I will lose
not only Esther, but Marie, my work, my future, as well as any respect I have for myself
and for what I have said and written.

When I went back in, I found that people were starting to leave. Mikhail appeared, having
already changed out of his stage clothes.
“Listen, what happened at the pizzeria…”
“Oh, don’t worry about that,” I said. “Let’s go for a walk by the Seine.”
Marie got the message and said that she needed an early night. I asked her to give us a lift
in her taxi as far as the bridge just opposite the Eiffel Tower; that way, I could walk home
afterward. I thought of asking where Mikhail lived, but felt that the question might be
construed as an attempt to verify, with my own eyes, that Esther really wasn’t living with
him.
On the way, Marie kept asking him what the meeting was about, and he always gave the
same answer: it’s a way of recovering love. He said that he had liked my story about the
railway tracks.
“That’s how love got lost,” he said. “When we started laying down rules for when love
should or shouldn’t appear.”
“When was that?” Marie asked.
“I don’t know, but I know it’s possible to retrieve that Energy. I know, because when I
dance, or when I hear the voice, love speaks to me.”
Marie didn’t know what he meant by “hearing the voice,” but, by then, we had reached
the bridge. Mikhail and I got out and started walking in the cold Paris night.

“I know you were frightened by what you saw. The biggest danger when someone has a
fit is that their tongue will roll back and they’ll suffocate. The owner of the restaurant
knew what to do, so it’s obviously happened there before. It’s not that unusual. But your
diagnosis is wrong. I’m not an epileptic. It happens whenever I get in touch with the
Energy.”
Of course he was an epileptic, but there was no point in contradicting him. I was trying to
act normally. I needed to keep the situation under control. I was surprised how easily he
had agreed to this second meeting.
“I need you. I need you to write something about the importance of love,” said Mikhail.
“Everyone knows that love is important. That’s what most books are about.”
“All right, let me put my request another way. I need you to write something about the
new Renaissance.”
“What’s the new Renaissance?”
“It’s similar to the Italian Renaissance of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, when
geniuses like Erasmus, Leonardo, and Michelangelo rejected the limitations of the
present and the oppressive conventions of their own time and turned instead to the past.
We’re beginning to see a return to a magical language, to alchemy and the idea of the
Mother Goddess, to people reclaiming the freedom to do what they believe in and not
what the church or the government demand of them. As in fifteenth- and sixteenthcentury
Florence, we are discovering that the past contains the answers to the future.
“Your story about the railway tracks, for example: In how many other areas of our lives
are we obeying rules we don’t understand? People read what you write—couldn’t you
introduce the subject somewhere?”
“I never make deals over what I write,” I replied, remembering once more that I needed
to keep my self-respect. “If it’s an interesting subject, if it’s in my soul, if the boat called
The Word carries me to that particular island, I might write about it. But none of this has
anything to do with my search for Esther.”
“I know, and I’m not trying to impose any conditions, I’m just suggesting something that
seems important to me.”
“Did she tell you about the Favor Bank?”
“She did. But this isn’t a matter for the Favor Bank. It’s to do with a mission that I can’t
fulfill on my own.”
“What you do in the Armenian restaurant, is that your mission?”
“That’s just a tiny part of it. We do the same thing on Fridays with a group of beggars.
And on Wednesdays we work with a group of new nomads.”
New nomads? It was best not to interrupt; the Mikhail who was talking to me now had
none of the arrogance he had shown in the pizzeria, none of the charisma he had revealed
on stage or the vulnerability he had revealed on that evening at the book signing. He was
a normal person, a colleague with whom we always end up, late at night, talking over the
world’s problems.
“I can only write about things that really touch my soul,” I insist.
“Would you like to come with us to talk to the beggars?”
I remembered Esther’s remark about the phony sadness in the eyes of those who should
be the most wretched people in the world.
“Let me think about it first.”
We were approaching the Louvre, but he paused to lean on the parapet, and we both
stood there contemplating the passing boats, which dazzled us with their spotlights.
“Look at them,” I said, because I needed to talk about something, afraid that he might get
bored and go home. “They only see what the spotlights show them. When they go home,
they’ll say they know Paris. Tomorrow, they’ll go and see the Mona Lisa and claim
they’ve visited the Louvre. But they don’t know Paris and have never really been to the
Louvre. All they did was go on a boat and look at a painting, one painting, instead of
looking at a whole city and trying to find out what’s happening in it, visiting the bars,
going down streets that don’t appear in any of the tourist guides, and getting lost in order
to find themselves again. It’s the difference between watching a porn movie and making
love.”
“I admire your self-control. There you are talking about the boats on the Seine, all the
while waiting for the right moment to ask the question that brought you to me. Feel free
to talk openly about anything you like.”
There was no hint of aggression in his voice, and so I decided to come straight to the
point.
“Where is Esther?”
“Physically, she’s a long way away, in Central Asia. Spiritually, she’s very close,
accompanying me day and night with her smile and the memory of her enthusiastic
words. She was the one who brought me here, a poor twenty-one-year-old with no future,
an aberration in the eyes of the people in my village, or else a madman or some sort of
shaman who had made a pact with the devil, and, in the eyes of the people in the city, a
mere peasant looking for work.
“I’ll tell you my story another day, but the long and the short of it is that I knew English
and started working as her interpreter. We were near the border of a country where the
Americans were building a lot of military bases, preparing for the war in Afghanistan,
and it was impossible to get a visa. I helped her cross the mountains illegally. During the
week we spent together, she made me realize that I was not alone, that she understood
me.
“I asked her what she was doing so far from home. After a few evasive answers, she
finally told me what she must have told you: that she was looking for the place where
love had hidden itself away. I told her about my mission to make the energy of love
circulate freely in the world again. Basically, we were both looking for the same thing.
“Esther went to the French embassy and arranged a visa for me, as an interpreter of the
Kazakh language, even though no one in my country speaks anything but Russian. I came
to live here. We always met up when she returned from her missions abroad; we made
two more trips together to Kazakhstan. She was fascinated by the Tengri culture, and by a
nomad she had met and whom she believed held the key to everything.”
I would have liked to know what Tengri was, but the question could wait. Mikhail
continued talking, and in his eyes I saw the same longing to be with Esther that I myself
was feeling.
“We started working here in Paris. It was her idea to get people together once a week.
She said, ‘The most important thing in all human relationships is conversation, but people
don’t talk anymore, they don’t sit down to talk and listen. They go to the theater, the
cinema, watch television, listen to the radio, read books, but they almost never talk. If we
want to change the world, we have to go back to a time when warriors would gather
around a fire and tell stories.’”
I remember Esther saying that all the really important things in our lives had arisen out of
long conversations we’d had sitting at a table in some bar or walking along a street or in a
park.
“It was my idea that these meetings should be on a Thursday because that’s how it is in
the tradition in which I was brought up. But it was her idea to make occasional forays
into the Paris streets at night. She said that beggars were the only ones who never pretend
to be happy; on the contrary, they pretend to be sad.
“She gave me your books to read. I sensed that you too—possibly unconsciously—
imagined the same world as we did. I realized that I wasn’t alone, even if I was the only
one to hear the voice. Gradually, as more and more people started coming to the
meetings, I began to believe that I really could fulfill my mission and help the energy of
love to return, even if that meant going back into the past, back to the moment when that
Energy left or went into hiding.”
“Why did Esther leave me?”
Was that all I was interested in? The question irritated Mikhail slightly.
“Out of love. Today, you used the example of the railway tracks. Well, she isn’t just
another track running along beside you. She doesn’t follow rules, nor, I imagine, do you.
I miss her too, you know.”
“So…”
“So if you want to find her, I can tell you where she is. I’ve already felt the same impulse,
but the voice tells me that now is not the moment, that no one should interrupt her
encounter with the energy of love. I respect the voice, the voice protects us, protects me,
you, Esther.”
“When will the moment be right?”
“Perhaps tomorrow, in a year’s time, or never, and, if that were the case, then we would
have to respect that decision. The voice is the Energy, and that is why she only brings
people together when they are both truly prepared for that moment. And yet we all try
and force the situation even if it means hearing the very words we don’t want to hear:
‘Go away.’ Anyone who fails to obey the voice and arrives earlier or later than he should,
will never get the thing he wants.”
“I’d rather hear her tell me to go away than be stuck with the Zahir day and night. If she
said that, she would at least cease to be an idée fixe and become a woman who now has a
different life and different thoughts.”
“She would no longer be the Zahir, but it would be a great loss. If a man and a woman
can make the Energy manifest, then they are helping all the men and women of the
world.”
“You’re frightening me. I love her, you know I do, and you say that she still loves me. I
don’t know what you mean by being prepared; I can’t live according to other people’s
expectations, not even Esther’s.”
“As I understand it from conversations I had with her, at some point you got lost. The
world started revolving exclusively around you.”
“That’s not true. She was free to forge her own path. She decided to become a war
correspondent, even though I didn’t want her to. She felt driven to find out why people
were unhappy, even though I told her this was impossible. Does she want me to go back
to being a railway track running alongside another railway track, always keeping the
same stupid distance apart, just because the Romans decided that was the way it should
be?”
“On the contrary.”
Mikhail started walking again, and I followed him.
“Do you believe that I hear a voice?”
“To be perfectly honest, I don’t know. But now that we’re here, let me show you
something.”
“Everyone thinks I’m just having an epileptic fit, and I let them believe that because it’s
easier. But the voice has been speaking to me ever since I was a child, when I first saw
the Lady.”
“What lady?”
“I’ll tell you later.”
“Whenever I ask you something, you say: ‘I’ll tell you later.’”
“The voice is telling me something now. I know that you’re anxious and frightened. In
the pizzeria, when I felt that warm wind and saw the lights, I knew that these were
symptoms of my connection with the Power. I knew it was there to help us both. If you
think that all the things I’ve been telling you are just the ravings of a young epileptic who
wants to manipulate the feelings of a famous writer, I’ll bring you a map tomorrow
showing you where Esther is living, and you can go and find her. But the voice is telling
us something.”
“Are you going to say what exactly, or will you tell me later?”
“I’ll tell you in a moment. I haven’t yet properly understood the message.”
“But you promise to give me the address and the map.”
“I promise. In the name of the divine energy of love, I promise. Now what was it you
wanted to show me?”
I pointed to a golden statue of a young woman riding a horse.
“This. She used to hear voices. As long as people respected what she said, everything was
fine. When they started to doubt her, the wind of victory changed direction.”
Joan of Arc, the Maid of Orléans, the heroine of the Hundred Years War, who, at the age
of seventeen, was made commander of the French troops because she heard voices and
the voices told her the best strategy for defeating the English. Two years later, she was
condemned to be burned at the stake, accused of witchcraft. I had used part of the
interrogation, dated February 24, 1431, in one of my books.
She was questioned by Maître Jean Beaupère. Asked how long it had been since she had
heard the voice, she replied:
“I heard it three times, yesterday and today. In the morning, at Vespers, and again when
the Ave Maria rang in the evening…”
Asked if the voice was in the room, she replied that she did not know, but that she had
been woken by the voice. It wasn’t in the room, but it was in the castle.
She asked the voice what she should do, and the voice asked her to get out of bed and
place the palms of her hands together.
Then she said to the bishop who was questioning her:
“You say you are my judge. Take care what you are doing; for in truth I am sent by God,
and you place yourself in great danger. My voices have entrusted to me certain things to
tell to the King, not to you. The voice comes to me from God. I have far greater fear of
doing wrong in saying to you things that would displease it than I have of answering
you.”
Mikhail looked at me: “Are you suggesting…”
“That you’re the reincarnation of Joan of Arc? No, I don’t think so. She died when she
was barely nineteen, and you’re twenty-five. She took command of the French troops
and, according to what you’ve told me, you can’t even take command of your own life.”
We sat down on the wall by the Seine.
“I believe in signs,” I said. “I believe in fate. I believe that every single day people are
offered the chance to make the best possible decision about everything they do. I believe
that I failed and that, at some point, I lost my connection with the woman I loved. And
now, all I need is to put an end to that cycle. That’s why I want the map, so that I can go
to her.”
He looked at me and he was once more the person who appeared on stage and went into a
trancelike state. I feared another epileptic fit—in the middle of the night, here, in an
almost deserted place.
“The vision gave me power. That power is almost visible, palpable. I can manage it, but I
can’t control it.”
“It’s getting a bit late for this kind of conversation. I’m tired, and so are you. Will you
give me that map and the address?”
“The voice…Yes, I’ll give you the map tomorrow afternoon. What’s your address?”
I gave him my address and was surprised to realize that he didn’t know where Esther and
I had lived.
“Do you think I slept with your wife?”
“I would never even ask. It’s none of my business.”
“But you did ask when we were in the pizzeria.”
I had forgotten. Of course it was my business, but I was no longer interested in his
answer.
Mikhail’s eyes changed. I felt in my pocket for something to place in his mouth should he
have a fit, but he seemed calm and in control.
“I can hear the voice now. Tomorrow I will bring you the map, detailed directions, and
times of flights. I believe that she is waiting for you. I believe that the world would be
happier if just two people, even two, were happier. Yet the voice is telling me that we
will not see each other tomorrow.”
“I’m having lunch with an actor over from the States, and I can’t possibly cancel, but I’ll
be home during the rest of the afternoon.”
“That’s not what the voice is telling me.”
“Is the voice forbidding you to help me find Esther?”
“No, I don’t think so. It was the voice that encouraged me to go to the book signing.
From then on, I knew more or less how things would turn out because I had read A Time
to Rend and a Time to Sew.”
“Right, then,” and I was terrified he might change his mind, “let’s stick to our
arrangement. I’ll be at home from two o’clock onward.”
“But the voice says the moment is not right.”
“You promised.”
“All right.”
He held out his hand and said that he would come to my apartment late tomorrow
afternoon. His last words to me that night were:
“The voice says that it will only allow these things to happen when the time is right.”
As I walked back home, the only voice I could hear was Esther’s, speaking of love. And
as I remembered that conversation, I realized that she had been talking about our
marriage.

When I was fifteen, I was desperate to find out about sex. But it was a sin, it was
forbidden. I couldn’t understand why it was a sin, could you? Can you tell me why all
religions, all over the world, even the most primitive of religions and cultures, consider
that sex is something that should be forbidden?”
“How did we get onto this subject? All right, why is sex something to be forbidden?”
“Because of food.”
“Food?”
“Thousands of years ago, tribes were constantly on the move; men could make love with
as many women as they wanted and, of course, have children by them. However, the
larger the tribe, the greater chance there was of it disappearing. Tribes fought among
themselves for food, killing first the children and then the women, because they were the
weakest. Only the strongest survived, but they were all men. And without women, men
cannot continue to perpetuate the species.
“Then someone, seeing what was happening in a neighboring tribe, decided to avoid the
same thing happening in his. He invented a story according to which the gods forbade
men to make love indiscriminately with any of the women in a tribe. They could only
make love with one or, at most, two. Some men were impotent, some women were
sterile, some members of the tribe, for perfectly natural reasons, thus had no children at
all, but no one was allowed to change partners.
“They all believed the story because the person who told it to them was speaking in the
name of the gods. He must have been different in some way: he perhaps had a deformity,
an illness that caused convulsions, or some special gift, something, at any rate, that
marked him out from the others, because that is how the first leaders emerged. In a few
years, the tribe grew stronger, with just the right number of men needed to feed everyone,
with enough women capable of reproducing and enough children to replace the hunters
and reproducers. Do you know what gives a woman most pleasure within marriage?”
“Sex.”
“No, making food. Watching her man eat. That is a woman’s moment of glory, because
she spends all day thinking about supper. And the reason must lie in that story hidden in
the past—in hunger, the threat of extinction, and the path to survival.”
“Do you regret not having had any children?”
“It didn’t happen, did it? How can I regret something that didn’t happen?”
“Do you think that would have changed our marriage?”
“How can I possibly know? I look at my friends, both male and female. Are they any
happier because they have children? Some are, some aren’t. And if they are happy with
their children that doesn’t make their relationship either better or worse. They still think
they have the right to control each other. They still think that the promise to live happily
ever after must be kept, even at the cost of daily unhappiness.”
“War isn’t good for you, Esther. It brings you into contact with a very different reality
from the one we experience here. I know I’ll die one day, but that just makes me live
each day as if it were a miracle. It doesn’t make me think obsessively about love,
happiness, sex, food, and marriage.”
“War doesn’t leave me time to think. I simply am, full stop. Whenever it occurs to me
that, at any moment, I could be hit by a stray bullet, I just think: ‘Good, at least I don’t
have to worry about what will happen to my child.’ But I think too: ‘What a shame, I’m
going to die and nothing will be left of me. I am only capable of losing a life, not
bringing a life into the world.’”
“Do you think there’s something wrong with our relationship? I only ask because I get
the feeling sometimes that you want to tell me something, but that you keep stopping
yourself.”
“Yes, there is something wrong. We feel obliged to be happy together. You think you
owe me everything that you are, and I feel privileged to have a man like you at my side.”
“I have a wife whom I love, but I don’t always remember that and find myself asking:
‘What’s wrong with me?’”
“It’s good that you’re able to recognize that, but I don’t think there’s anything wrong
with you, or with me, because I ask myself the same question. What’s wrong is the way
in which we show our love now. If we were to accept that this creates problems, we could
live with those problems and be happy. It would be a constant battle, but it would at least
keep us active, alive and cheerful, with many universes to conquer; the trouble is we’re
heading toward a point where things are becoming too comfortable, where love stops
creating problems and confrontations and becomes instead merely a solution.”
“What’s wrong with that?”
“Everything. I can no longer feel the energy of love, what people call passion, flowing
through my flesh and through my soul.”
“But something is left.”
“Left? Does every marriage have to end like this, with passion giving way to something
people call ‘a mature relationship’? I need you. I miss you. Sometimes I’m jealous. I like
thinking about what to give you for supper, even though sometimes you don’t even notice
what you’re eating. But there’s a lack of joy.”
“No, there isn’t. Whenever you’re far away, I wish you were near. I imagine the
conversations we’ll have when you or I come back from a trip. I phone you to make sure
everything’s all right. I need to hear your voice every day. I’m still passionate about you,
I can guarantee you that.”
“It’s the same with me, but what happens when we’re together? We argue, we quarrel
over nothing, one of us wants to change the other, to impose his or her view of reality.
You demand things of me that make no sense at all, and I do the same. Sometimes, in the
silence of our hearts, we say to ourselves: ‘How good it would be to be free, to have no
commitments.’”
“You’re right. And at moments like that, I feel lost, because I know that I’m with the
woman I want to be with.”
“And I’m with the man I always wanted to have by my side.”
“Do you think that could change?”
“As I get older, and fewer men look at me, I find myself thinking: ‘Just leave things as
they are.’ I’m sure I can happily deceive myself for the rest of my life. And yet, whenever
I go off to cover a war, I see that a greater love exists, much greater than the hatred that
makes men kill each other. And then, and only then, do I think I can change things.”
“But you can’t be constantly covering wars.”
“Nor can I live constantly in the sort of peace that I find with you. It’s destroying the one
important thing I have: my relationship with you, even if the intensity of my love remains
undiminished.”
“Millions of people the world over are thinking the same thing right now, they resist
fiercely and allow those moments of depression to pass. They withstand one, two, three
crises and, finally, find peace.”
“You know that isn’t how it is. Otherwise you wouldn’t have written the books you’ve
written.”

I had arranged to meet the American actor-director for lunch at Roberto’s pizzeria. I
needed to go back there as soon as possible in order to dispel any bad impression I might
have made. Before I left, I told the maid and the caretaker of the apartment building that
if I was not back in time and a young man with Mongolian features should deliver a
package for me, they must take him up to my apartment, ask him to wait in the living
room, and give him anything he needed. If, for some reason, the young man could not
wait, then they should ask him to leave the package with one of them.
Above all, they must not let him leave without handing over the package!
I caught a taxi and asked to be dropped off on the corner of Boulevard St-Germain and
Rue des Sts-Pères. A fine rain was falling, but it was only a few yards to the restaurant,
its discreet sign, and Roberto’s generous smile, for he sometimes stood outside, smoking
a cigarette. A woman with a baby stroller was coming toward me along the narrow
pavement, and because there wasn’t room for both of us, I stepped off the curb to let her
pass.
It was then, in slow motion, that the world gave a giant lurch: the ground became the sky,
the sky became the ground; I had time to notice a few architectural details on the top of
the building on the corner—I had often walked past before, but had never looked up. I
remember the sensation of surprise, the feeling of a wind blowing hard in my ear, and the
sound of a dog barking in the distance; then everything went dark.
I was bundled abruptly down a black hole at the end of which was a light. Before I could
reach it, however, invisible hands were dragging me roughly back up, and I woke to
voices and shouts all around me: it could only have lasted a matter of seconds. I was
aware of the taste of blood in my mouth, the smell of wet asphalt, and then I realized that
I had had an accident. I was conscious and unconscious at the same time; I tried without
success to move; I could make out another person lying on the ground beside me; I could
smell that person’s smell, her perfume; I imagined it must be the woman who had been
pushing her baby along the pavement. Oh, dear God!
Someone came over and tried to help me up; I yelled at them not to touch me, any
movement could be dangerous. I had learned during a trivial conversation one trivial
night that if I ever injured my neck, any sudden movement could leave me permanently
paralyzed.
I struggled to remain conscious; I waited for a pain that never came; I tried to move, then
thought better of it. I experienced a feeling like cramp, like torpor. I again asked not to be
moved. I heard a distant siren and knew then that I could sleep, that I no longer needed to
fight to save my life; whether it was won or lost, it was no longer up to me, it was up to
the doctors, to the nurses, to fate, to “the thing,” to God.
I heard the voice of a child—she told me her name, but I couldn’t quite grasp it—telling
me to keep calm, promising me that I wouldn’t die. I wanted to believe what she said, I
begged her to stay by my side, but she vanished; I was aware of someone placing
something plastic around my neck, putting a mask over my face, and then I went to sleep
again, and this time there were no dreams.

When I regained consciousness, all I could hear was a horrible buzzing in my ears;
the rest was silence and utter darkness. Suddenly, I felt everything moving, and I was
sure I was being carried along in my coffin, that I was about to be buried alive!
I tried banging on the walls, but I couldn’t move a muscle. For what seemed an eternity, I
felt as if I were being propelled helplessly forward; then, mustering all my remaining
strength, I uttered a scream that echoed around the enclosed space and came back to my
own ears, almost deafening me; but I knew that once I had screamed, I was safe, for a
light immediately began to appear at my feet: they had realized I wasn’t dead!
Light, blessed light—which would save me from that worst of all tortures, suffocation—
was gradually illuminating my whole body: they were finally removing the coffin lid. I
broke out in a cold sweat, felt the most terrible pain, but was also happy and relieved that
they had realized their mistake and that joy could return to the world!
The light finally reached my eyes: a soft hand touched mine, someone with an angelic
face was wiping the sweat from my brow.
“Don’t worry,” said the angelic face, with its golden hair and white robes. “I’m not an
angel, you didn’t die, and this isn’t a coffin, it’s just a body scanner, to find out if you
suffered any other injuries. There doesn’t appear to be anything seriously wrong, but
you’ll have to stay in for observation.”
“No broken bones?”
“Just general abrasions. If I brought you a mirror, you’d be horrified, but the swelling
will go down in a few days.”
I tried to get up, but she very gently stopped me. Then I felt a terrible pain in my head
and groaned.
“You’ve had an accident; it’s only natural that you should be in pain.”
“I think you’re lying to me,” I managed to say. “I’m a grown man, I’ve had a good life, I
can take bad news without panicking. Some blood vessel in my head is about to burst,
isn’t it?”
Two nurses appeared and put me on a stretcher. I realized that I had an orthopedic collar
around my neck.
“Someone told us that you asked not to be moved,” said the angel. “Just as well. You’ll
have to wear this collar for a while, but barring any unforeseen events—because one can
never tell what might happen—you’ll just have had a nasty shock. You’re very lucky.”
“How long? I can’t stay here.”
No one said anything. Marie was waiting for me outside the radiology unit, smiling. The
doctors had obviously already told her that my injuries were not, in principle, very
serious. She stroked my hair and carefully disguised any shock she might feel at my
appearance.
Our small cortège proceeded along the corridor—Marie, the two nurses pushing the
stretcher, and the angel in white. The pain in my head was getting worse all the time.
“Nurse, my head…”
“I’m not a nurse. I’m your doctor for the moment. We’re waiting for your own doctor to
arrive. As for your head, don’t worry. When you have an accident, your body closes
down all the blood vessels as a defense mechanism, to avoid loss of blood. When it sees
that the danger is over, the vessels open up again, the blood starts to flow, and that feels
painful, but that’s all it is. Anyway, if you like, I can give you something to help you
sleep.”
I refused. And as if surfacing from some dark corner of my soul, I remembered the words
I had heard the day before:
“The voice says that it will only allow these things to happen when the time is right.”
He couldn’t have known. It wasn’t possible that everything that had happened on the
corner of Boulevard St-Germain and Rue des Sts-Pères was the result of some universal
conspiracy, of something predetermined by the gods, who, despite being fully occupied
in taking care of this precariously balanced planet on the verge of extinction, had all
downed tools merely to prevent me from going in search of the Zahir. Mikhail could not
possibly have foreseen the future, unless he really had heard a voice and there was a plan
and this was all far more important than I imagined.
Everything was beginning to be too much for me: Marie’s smiles, the possibility that
someone really had heard a voice, the increasingly agonizing pain in my head.
“Doctor, I’ve changed my mind. I want to sleep. I can’t stand the pain.”
She said something to one of the nurses pushing the trolley, who went off and returned
even before we had reached my room. I felt a prick in my arm and immediately fell
asleep.

When I woke up, I wanted to know exactly what had happened; I wanted to know if the
woman passing me on the pavement had escaped injury and what had happened to her
baby. Marie said that I needed to rest, but, by then, Dr. Louit, my doctor and friend, had
arrived and felt that there was no reason not to tell me. I had been knocked down by a
motorbike. The body I had seen lying on the ground beside me had been the young male
driver. He had been taken to the same hospital and, like me, had escaped with only minor
abrasions. The police investigation carried out immediately after the accident made it
clear that I had been standing in the middle of the road at the time of the accident, thus
putting the motorcyclist’s life at risk.
It was, apparently, all my fault, but the motorcyclist had decided not to press charges.
Marie had been to see him and talk to him; she had learned that he was an immigrant
working illegally and was afraid of having any dealings with the police. He had been
discharged twenty-four hours later, because he had been wearing a helmet, which
lessened the risk of any damage to the brain.
“Did you say he left twenty-four hours later? Does that mean I’ve been in here more than
a day?”
“You’ve been in here for three days. When you came out of the body scanner, the doctor
here phoned me to ask if she could keep you on sedatives. It seemed to me that you’d
been rather tense, irritated, and depressed lately, and so I told her she could.”
“So what happens next?”
“Two more days in the hospital and then three weeks with that contraption around your
neck; you’re through the critical forty-eight-hour period. Of course, part of your body
could still rebel against the idea of continuing to behave itself and then we’d have a
problem on our hands. But let’s face that emergency if and when it arises; there’s no
point in worrying unnecessarily.”
“So, I could still die?”
“As you well know, all of us not only can, but will, die.”
“Yes, but could I still die as a result of the accident?”
Dr. Louit paused.
“Yes. There’s always the chance that a blood clot could have formed which the machines
have failed to pick up and that it could break free at any moment and cause an embolism.
There’s also the possibility that a cell has gone berserk and is starting to form a cancer.”
“You shouldn’t say things like that,” said Marie.
“We’ve been friends for five years. He asked me a question and I gave him an answer.
And now, if you don’t mind, I have to get back to my office. Medicine isn’t quite as you
think. In the world we live in, if a boy goes out to buy five apples, but arrives home with
only two, people would conclude that he had eaten the three missing apples. In my world,
there are other possibilities: he could have eaten them, but he could also have been
robbed; the money he’d been given might not have been enough to buy the five apples
he’d been sent for; he could have lost them on the way home; he could have met someone
who was hungry and decided to share the fruit with that person, and so on. In my world,
everything is possible and everything is relative.”
“What do you know about epilepsy?”
Marie knew at once that I was talking about Mikhail and could not conceal a flicker of
displeasure. She said she had to go, there was a film crew waiting.
Dr. Louit, however, having picked up his things ready to leave, stopped to answer my
question.
“It’s an excess of electrical impulses in one specific area of the brain, which provokes
convulsions of greater or lesser severity. There’s no definitive study on the subject, but
they think attacks may be provoked when the person is under great strain. But don’t
worry, while epileptic symptoms can appear at any age, epilepsy itself is unlikely to be
brought on by colliding with a motorcycle.”
“So what causes it?”
“I’m not a specialist, but, if you like, I can find out.”
“Yes, if you would. And I have another question too, but please don’t go thinking that my
brain’s been affected by the accident. Is it possible that epileptics can hear voices and
have premonitions?”
“Did someone tell you this accident was going to happen?”
“Not exactly, but that’s what I took it to mean.”
“Look, I can’t stay any longer, I’m giving Marie a lift, but I’ll see what I can find out
about epilepsy for you.”

For the two days that Marie was away, and despite the shock of the accident, the Zahir
took up its usual space in my life. I knew that if Mikhail had kept his word, there would
be an envelope waiting for me at home containing Esther’s address; now, however, the
thought frightened me.
What if Mikhail was telling the truth about the voice?
I started trying to remember the details of the accident: I had stepped down from the curb,
automatically looking to see if anything was coming; I’d seen a car approaching, but it
had appeared to be a safe distance away. And yet I had still been hit, possibly by a
motorbike that was trying to overtake the car and was outside my field of vision.
I believe in signs. After I had walked the road to Santiago, everything had changed
completely: what we need to learn is always there before us, we just have to look around
us with respect and attention in order to discover where God is leading us and which step
we should take next. I also learned a respect for mystery. As Einstein said, God does not
play dice with the universe; everything is interconnected and has a meaning. That
meaning may remain hidden nearly all the time, but we always know we are close to our
true mission on earth when what we are doing is touched with the energy of enthusiasm.
If it is, then all is well. If not, then we had better change direction.
When we are on the right path, we follow the signs, and if we occasionally stumble, the
Divine comes to our aid, preventing us from making a mistake. Was the accident a sign?
Had Mikhail intuited a sign that was intended for me?
I decided that the answer to these questions was yes.
And perhaps because of this, because I accepted my destiny and allowed myself to be
guided by something greater than myself, I noticed that, during the day, the Zahir began
to diminish in intensity. I knew that all I had to do was open the envelope, read her
address, and go and knock on her door, but the signs all indicated that this was not the
moment. If Esther really was as important in my life as I thought, if she still loved me (as
Mikhail said she did), why force a situation that would simply lead me into making the
same mistakes I had made in the past?
How to avoid repeating them?
By knowing myself better, by finding out what had changed and what had provoked this
sudden break in a road that had always been marked by joy.
Was that enough?
No, I also needed to know who Esther was, what changes she had undergone during the
time we were together.
And was it enough to be able to answer these two questions?
There was a third: Why had fate brought us together?
I had a lot of free time in that hospital room, and so I made a general review of my life. I
had always sought both adventure and security, knowing that the two things did not really
mix. I was sure of my love for Esther and yet I easily fell in love with other women,
merely because the game of seduction is the most interesting game in the world.
Had I shown my wife that I loved her? Perhaps for a while, but not always. Why?
Because I didn’t think it was necessary; she must know I loved her; she couldn’t possibly
doubt my feelings.
I remember that, many years ago, someone asked me if there was a common denominator
among all the various girlfriends I had had in my life. The answer was easy: me. And
when I realized this, I saw how much time I had wasted looking for the right person—the
women changed, but I remained the same and so got nothing from those shared
experiences. I had lots of girlfriends, but I was always waiting for the right person. I
controlled and was controlled and the relationship never went any further than that, until
Esther arrived and changed everything.
I was thinking tenderly of my ex-wife; I was no longer obsessed with finding her, with
finding out why she had left without a word of explanation. A Time to Rend and a Time
to Sew had been a true account of my marriage, but it was, above all, my own testimony,
declaring that I am capable of loving and needing someone else. Esther deserved more
than just words, especially since I had never said those words while we were together.
It is always important to know when something has reached its end. Closing circles,
shutting doors, finishing chapters, it doesn’t matter what we call it; what matters is to
leave in the past those moments in life that are over. Slowly, I began to realize that I
could not go back and force things to be as they once were: those two years, which up
until then had seemed an endless inferno, were now beginning to show me their true
meaning.

And that meaning went far beyond my marriage: all men and all women are connected by
an energy which many people call love, but which is, in fact, the raw material from which
the universe was built. This energy cannot be manipulated, it leads us gently forward, it
contains all we have to learn in this life. If we try to make it go in the direction we want,
we end up desperate, frustrated, disillusioned, because that energy is free and wild.
We could spend the rest of our life saying that we love such a person or thing, when the
truth is that we are merely suffering because, instead of accepting love’s strength, we are
trying to diminish it so that it fits the world in which we imagine we live.
The more I thought about this, the weaker the Zahir became and the closer I moved to
myself. I prepared myself mentally to do a great deal of work, work that would require
much silence, meditation, and perseverance. The accident had helped me understand that
I could not force something that had not yet reached its time to sew.
I remembered what Dr. Louit had said: after such a trauma to the body, death could come
at any moment. What if that were true? What if in ten minutes’ time, my heart stopped
beating?
A nurse came into the room to bring me my supper and I asked him:
“Have you thought about your funeral?”
“Don’t worry,” he replied. “You’ll survive; you already look much better.”
“I’m not worried. I know I’m going to survive. A voice told me I would.”
I mentioned the “voice” deliberately, just to provoke him. He eyed me suspiciously,
thinking that perhaps it was time to call for another examination and check that my brain
really hadn’t been affected.
“I know I’m going to survive,” I went on. “Perhaps for a day, for a year, for thirty or
forty years, but one day, despite all the scientific advances, I’ll leave this world and I’ll
have a funeral. I was thinking about it just now and I wondered if you had ever thought
about it.”
“Never. And I don’t want to either; besides, that’s what really terrifies me, knowing that
everything will end.”
“Whether you like it or not, whether you agree or disagree, that is a reality none of us can
escape. Do you fancy having a little chat about it?”
“I’ve got other patients to see, I’m afraid,” he said, putting the food down on the table
and leaving as quickly as possible, as if running away—not from me, but from my words.
The nurse might not want to talk about it, but how about me thinking about it alone? I
remembered some lines from a poem I had learned as a child:

 When the Unwanted Guest arrives…
 I might be afraid.
 I might smile or say:
 My day was good, let night fall.
 You will find the fields ploughed, the house clean,
 the table set,
 and everything in its place.

It would be nice if that were true—everything in its place. And what would my epitaph
be? Esther and I had both made wills, in which, among other things, we had chosen
cremation: my ashes were to be scattered to the winds in a place called Cebreiro, on the
road to Santiago, and her ashes were to be scattered over the sea. So there would be no
inscribed headstone.
But what if I could choose an epitaph? I would ask to have these words engraved:
“He died while he was still alive.”
That might sound like a contradiction in terms, but I knew many people who had ceased
to live, even though they continued to work and eat and engage in their usual social
activities. They did everything automatically, oblivious to the magic moment that each
day brings with it, never stopping to think about the miracle of life, never understanding
that the next minute could be their last on the face of this planet.
It was pointless trying to explain this to the nurse, largely because it was a different nurse
who came to collect the supper dish. This new nurse started bombarding me with
questions, possibly on the orders of some doctor. He wanted to know if I could remember
my name, if I knew what year it was, the name of the president of the United States, the
sort of thing they ask when they’re assessing your mental state.
And all because I asked the questions that every human being should ask: Have you
thought about your funeral? Do you realize that sooner or later you’re going to die?
That night, I went to sleep smiling. The Zahir was disappearing, and Esther was
returning, and if I were to die then, despite all that had happened in my life, despite all
my failures, despite the disappearance of the woman I loved, the injustices I had suffered
or inflicted on others, I had remained alive until the last moment, and could, with all
certainty, affirm: “My day was good, let night fall.”

Two days later, I was back home. Marie went to prepare lunch, and I glanced through
the accumulated correspondence. The entry phone rang. It was the caretaker to say that
the envelope I had expected the previous week had been delivered and should be on my
desk.
I thanked him, but, contrary to all my expectations, I was not in a rush to open it. Marie
and I had lunch; I asked her how filming had gone and she asked me about my immediate
plans, given that I wouldn’t be able to go out much while I was wearing the orthopedic
collar. She said that she could, if necessary, come and stay.
“I’m supposed to do an appearance on some Korean TV channel, but I can always put it
off or even cancel it altogether. That’s, of course, if you need my company.”
“Oh, I do, and it would be lovely to have you around.”
She smiled broadly and picked up the phone to call her manager and ask her to change
her engagements. I heard her say: “Don’t tell them I’m ill though. I’m superstitious, and
whenever I’ve used that excuse in the past, I’ve always come down with something really
horrible. Just tell them I’ve got to look after the person I love.”
I had a series of urgent things to do too: interviews to be postponed, invitations that
required replies, letters to be written thanking various people for the phone calls and
flowers I’d received, things to read, prefaces and recommendations to write. Marie spent
the whole day on the phone to my agent, reorganizing my diary so that no one would be
left without a response. We had supper at home every evening, talking about the
interesting and the banal, just like any other couple. During one of these suppers, after a
few glasses of wine, she remarked that I had changed.
“It’s as if having a brush with death had somehow brought you back to life,” she said.
“That happens to everyone.”
“But I must say—and, don’t worry, I don’t want to start an argument and I’m not about to
have an attack of jealousy—you haven’t mentioned Esther once since coming home. The
same thing happened when you finished A Time to Rend and a Time to Sew: the book
acted as a kind of therapy, the effects of which, alas, didn’t last very long.”
“Are you saying that the accident has affected my brain?”
My tone wasn’t aggressive, but she nevertheless decided to change the subject and started
telling me about a terrifying helicopter trip she’d had from Monaco to Cannes. Later, in
bed, we made love—with great difficulty given my orthopedic collar—but we made love
nevertheless and felt very close.
Four days later, the vast pile of paper on my desk had disappeared. There was only a
large, white envelope bearing my name and the number of my apartment. Marie went to
open it, but I told her it could wait.
She didn’t ask me about it; perhaps it was information about my bank accounts or some
confidential correspondence, possibly from another woman. I didn’t explain either. I
simply removed it from the desk and placed it on a shelf among some books. If I kept
looking at it, the Zahir would come back.
At no point had the love I felt for Esther diminished, but every day spent in the hospital
had brought back some intriguing memory: not of conversations we had had, but of
moments we had spent together in silence. I remembered her eyes, which reflected her
inner being. Whenever she set off on some new adventure, she was an enthusiastic young
girl, or a wife proud of her husband’s success, or a journalist fascinated by every subject
she wrote about. Later, she was the wife who no longer seemed to have a place in my life.
That look of sadness in her eyes had started before she told me she wanted to be a war
correspondent; it became a look of joy every time she came back from an assignment, but
it was only a matter of days before the look of sadness returned.
One afternoon, the phone rang.
“It’s that young man,” Marie said, passing me the phone.
At the other end I heard Mikhail’s voice, first saying how sorry he was about the accident
and then asking me if I had received the envelope.
“Yes, it’s here with me.”
“Are you going to go and find her?”
Marie was listening to our conversation and so I thought it best to change the subject.
“We can talk about that when I see you.”
“I’m not nagging or anything, but you did promise to help me.”
“And I always keep my promises. As soon as I’m better, we’ll get together.”
He left me his cell phone number, and when I hung up, I looked across at Marie, who
seemed a different woman.
“So nothing’s changed then,” she said.
“On the contrary. Everything’s changed.”
I should have expressed myself more clearly and explained that I still wanted to see
Esther, that I knew where she was. When the time was right, I would take a train, taxi,
plane, or whatever just to be by her side. This would, of course, mean losing the woman
who was there by my side at that moment, steadfastly doing all she could to prove how
important I was to her.
I was, of course, being a coward. I was ashamed of myself, but that was what life was
like, and—in a way I couldn’t really explain—I loved Marie too.
The other reason I didn’t say more was because I had always believed in signs, and when
I recalled the moments of silence I had shared with my wife, I knew that—with or
without voices, with or without explanations—the time to find Esther had still not yet
arrived. I needed to concentrate more on those shared silences than on any of our
conversations, because that would give me the freedom I needed to understand the time
when things had gone right between us and the moment when they had started to go
wrong.
Marie was there, looking at me. Could I go on being disloyal to someone who was doing
so much for me? I started to feel uncomfortable, but I couldn’t tell her everything,
unless…unless I could find an indirect way of saying what I was feeling.
“Marie, let’s suppose that two firemen go into a forest to put out a small fire. Afterward,
when they emerge and go over to a stream, the face of one is all smeared with black,
while the other man’s face is completely clean. My question is this: Which of the two
will wash his face?”
“That’s a silly question. The one with the dirty face, of course.”
“No, the one with the dirty face will look at the other man and assume that he looks like
him. And, vice versa, the man with the clean face will see his colleague covered in grime
and say to himself: I must be dirty too. I’d better have a wash.”
“What are you trying to say?”
“I’m saying that, during the time I spent in the hospital, I came to realize that I was
always looking for myself in the women I loved. I looked at their lovely, clean faces and
saw myself reflected in them. They, on the other hand, looked at me and saw the dirt on
my face and, however intelligent or self-confident they were, they ended up seeing
themselves reflected in me and thinking that they were worse than they were. Please,
don’t let that happen to you.”
I would like to have added: that’s what happened to Esther, and I’ve only just realized it,
remembering now how the look in her eyes changed. I’d always absorbed her life and her
energy, and that made me feel happy and confident, able to go forward. She, on the other
hand, had looked at me and felt ugly, diminished, because, as the years passed, my
career—the career that she had done so much to make a reality—had relegated our
relationship to second place.
If I was to see her again, my face needed to be as clean as hers. Before I could find her, I
must first find myself.
ARIADNE’S THREAD

I am born in a small village, some kilometers from a slightly larger village where they
have a school and a museum dedicated to a poet who lived there many years before. My
father is nearly fifty years old, my mother is twenty-five. They met only recently when he
was selling carpets; he had traveled all the way from Russia, but when he met her he
decided to give up everything for her sake. She could be his daughter, but she behaves
more like his mother, even helping him to sleep, something he has been unable to do
properly since he was seventeen and was sent to fight the Germans in Stalingrad, one of
the longest and bloodiest battles of the Second World War. Out of a battalion of three
thousand men, only three survived.”

Oddly, Mikhail speaks almost entirely in the present tense. He doesn’t say “I was born”
but “I am born.” It is as if everything were happening here and now.

“In Stalingrad, my father and his best friend are caught in an exchange of fire on their
way back from a reconnaissance patrol. They take cover in a bomb crater and spend two
days in the mud and snow, with no food and no means of keeping warm. They can hear
other Russians talking in a nearby building and know that they must try to reach them,
but the firing never stops, the smell of blood fills the air, the wounded lie screaming for
help day and night. Suddenly, everything falls silent. My father’s friend, thinking that the
Germans have withdrawn, stands up. My father tugs at his legs, yelling, ‘Get down!’ But
it’s too late; a bullet pierces his friend’s skull.
“Another two days pass, my father is alone, with his friend’s corpse beside him. He can’t
stop yelling, ‘Get down!’ At last, someone rescues him and takes him to the nearby
building. There is no food, only ammunition and cigarettes. They eat the tobacco. A week
later, they start to eat the flesh of their dead, frozen companions. A third battalion arrives
and shoots a way through to them; the survivors are rescued, the wounded are treated and
then immediately sent back to the front. Stalingrad must not fall; the future of Russia is at
stake. After four months of intense fighting, of cannibalism, of limbs being amputated
because of frostbite, the Germans finally surrender—it is the beginning of the end for
Hitler and his Third Reich. My father returns on foot to his village, almost a thousand
kilometers from Stalingrad. He now finds it almost impossible to sleep, and when he does
manage to drop off, he dreams every night of the friend he could have saved.
“Two years later, the war ends. He receives a medal, but cannot find employment. He
takes part in services of commemoration, but has almost nothing to eat. He is considered
one of the heroes of Stalingrad, but can only survive by doing odd jobs, for which he is
paid a pittance. In the end, someone offers him work selling carpets. Suffering as he does
from insomnia, he chooses to travel at night; he gets to know smugglers, wins their
confidence, and begins to earn some money.
“He is caught out by the Communist government, who accuse him of consorting with
criminals and, despite being a war hero, he spends the next ten years in Siberia labeled ‘a
traitor of the people.’ When he is finally released, he is an old man and the only thing he
knows anything about is carpets. He manages to reestablish his old contacts, someone
gives him a few carpets to sell, but no one is interested in buying—times are hard. He
decides to go a long way away, begging as he goes, and ends up in Kazakhstan.
“He is old and alone, but he needs to work in order to eat. He spends the days doing odd
jobs and, at night, sleeps only fitfully and is woken by his own cries of ‘Get down!’
Strangely enough, despite all that he has been through, despite the insomnia, the poor
food, the frustrations, the physical wear and tear, and the cigarettes that he smokes
whenever he can scrounge them, he still has an iron constitution.
“In a small village, he meets a young woman. She lives with her parents; she takes him to
her house, for, in that region, hospitality is paramount. They let him sleep in the living
room, but are woken by his screams. The girl goes to him, says a prayer, strokes his head,
and for the first time in many decades, he sleeps peacefully.
“The following day, she says that, when she was a girl, she had dreamed that a very old
man would give her a child. She waited for years, had various suitors, but was always
disappointed. Her parents were terribly worried, for they did not want to see their only
daughter end up a spinster, rejected by the community.
“She asks him if he will marry her. He is taken aback; after all, she is young enough to be
his granddaughter, and so he says nothing. At sunset, in the small living room, she asks if
she can stroke his head before he goes to sleep. He enjoys another peaceful night.
“The following day, the subject of marriage comes up again, this time in the presence of
her parents, who seem to think it a good idea; they just want their daughter to find a
husband and to cease being a source of family shame. They invent a story about an old
man who has come from far away and who is, in fact, a wealthy trader in carpets, but has
grown weary of living a life of luxury and comfort, and has given it all up in order to go
in search of adventure. People are impressed, they imagine a generous dowry, huge bank
accounts, and think how lucky my mother is to have finally found someone who can take
her away from that village in the back of beyond. My father listens to these stories with a
mixture of fascination and surprise; he thinks of all the years he has spent alone,
traveling, of all he has suffered, of how he never again found his own family, and he
thinks that now, for the first time in his life, he could have a home of his own. He accepts
the proposal, colludes with the lies about his past, and they get married according to the
Muslim tradition. Two months later, she is pregnant with me.
“I live with my father until I am seven years old; he sleeps well, works in the fields, goes
hunting, and talks to the other villagers about his money and his lands; and he looks at
my mother as if she were the only good thing that has ever happened to him. I grow up
believing that I am the son of a rich man, but one night, by the fire, he tells me about his
past and why he married, but begs me not to tell anyone else. Soon, he says, he will die,
and four months later he does. He breathes his last in my mother’s arms, smiling, as if he
had never known a moment’s sadness. He dies a happy man.”

Mikhail is telling his story on a very cold spring night, although it is certainly not as cold
as in Stalingrad, where temperatures can plummet to -35°C. We are sitting with some
beggars who are warming themselves before an improvised bonfire. I had gone there after
a second phone call from Mikhail, asking me to keep my part of the promise. During our
conversation, he did not once mention the envelope he had left at my apartment, as if he
knew—perhaps through the voice—that I had, in the end, decided to follow the signs and
allow things to happen in their own time and thus free myself from the power of the
Zahir.
When he asked me to meet him in one of the most dangerous parts of Paris, my first
reaction was one of alarm. Normally, I would have said that I was far too busy and tried
to convince him that we would be better off going to some cozy bar where we could
safely discuss important matters. I was still afraid that he might have another epileptic fit
in public, even though I now knew what to do, but that was preferable to the risk of being
mugged when I was wearing an orthopedic collar and had no way of defending myself.
Mikhail insisted: I had to meet the beggars; they were part of his life and part of Esther’s
life too. I had realized while I was in the hospital that there was something wrong with
my own life and that change was urgently needed. How best to achieve that change? By
doing something totally different; for example, going to dangerous places and meeting
social outcasts.
There is a story about a Greek hero, Theseus, who goes into a labyrinth in order to slay a
monster. His beloved, Ariadne, gives him one end of a thread so that he can unroll it as
he goes and thus be able to find his way out again. Sitting with those people, listening to
Mikhail’s story, it occurs to me that I have not experienced anything like this for a long
time—the taste of the unknown, of adventure. Who knows, perhaps Ariadne’s thread was
waiting for me in precisely the kind of place that I would never normally visit, or only if I
was convinced that I had to make an enormous effort to change my story and my life.
Mikhail continued his story, and I saw that the whole group was listening to what he was
saying: the most satisfying encounters do not always happen around elegant tables in
nice, warm restaurants.

“Every day, I have to walk nearly an hour to the village where I go to school. I see the
women going to fetch water, the endless steppes, the Russian soldiers driving past in long
convoys, the snow-capped mountains which, I am told, conceal a vast country: China.
The village I walk to each day has a museum dedicated to its one poet, a mosque, a
school, and three or four streets. We are taught about the existence of a dream, an ideal:
we must fight for the victory of Communism and for equality among all human beings. I
do not believe in this dream, because even in this wretchedly poor village, there are
marked differences: the Party representatives are above everyone else; now and again,
they visit the big city, Almaty, and return bearing packages of exotic food, presents for
their children, expensive clothes.
“One afternoon, on my way home, I feel a strong wind blowing, see lights all around me,
and lose consciousness for a few moments. When I come to, I am sitting on the ground,
and a very white little girl, wearing a white dress with a blue belt, is floating in the air
above me. She smiles but says nothing, then disappears.
“I run home, interrupt my mother’s work, and tell her what I have seen. She is terrified
and asks me never to repeat what I have just told her. She explains to me—as well as one
can explain such a complicated concept to an eight-year-old boy—that it was just a
hallucination. I tell her that I really did see the girl, that I can describe her in every detail.
I add that I wasn’t afraid and came home at once because I wanted her to know what had
happened.
“The following day, coming back from school, I look for the girl, but she isn’t there.
Nothing happens for a whole week, and I begin to think that perhaps my mother was
right: I must simply have dropped asleep and dreamed it all.
“Then, this time very early one morning, on my way to school, I again see the girl
floating in the air and surrounded by a white halo. I don’t fall to the ground or see any
flashing lights. We stand for a while, looking at each other; she smiles and I smile back; I
ask her name, but receive no answer. At school, I ask my classmates if they have ever
seen a girl floating in the air. They all laugh.
“During class, I am summoned to the headmaster’s office. He explains to me that I must
have some mental problem—there is no such thing as ‘visions’; the only reality is what
we see around us; religion was merely invented to fool the people. I ask about the
mosque in the city; he says that only the old and superstitious go there, ignorant, idle
people who lack the necessary energy to rebuild the socialist world. Then he issues a
threat: if I repeat the story about the little girl, I will be expelled. Terrified, I beg him not
to say anything to my mother, and he agrees, as long as I tell my classmates that I made
the whole thing up.
“He keeps his promise and I keep mine. My friends aren’t much interested anyway and
don’t even ask me to show them the place where I saw the girl. However, she continues
to appear to me for the whole of the following month. Sometimes I faint first, sometimes
I don’t. We never talk, we simply stay together for as long as she chooses to stay. My
mother is beginning to grow worried because I always arrive home at a different time.
One night, she forces me to explain what I do between leaving school and getting home. I
again tell her about the little girl.
“To my surprise, this time, instead of scolding me, she says that she will go to the place
with me. The following day, we wake early and, when we arrive, the girl appears, but my
mother cannot see her. My mother tells me to ask the girl something about my father. I
don’t understand the question, but I do as she requests, and then, for the first time, I hear
the voice. The girl does not move her lips, but I know she is talking to me: She says that
my father is fine and is watching over us, and that he is being rewarded now for all his
sufferings on earth. She suggests that I remind my mother about the heater. I do so, and
my mother starts to cry and explains that because of his many hardships during the war,
the thing my father most enjoyed was sitting next to a heater. The girl says that the next
time my mother passes that way she should tie a scrap of fabric and a prayer around the
small tree growing there.
“The visions continue for a whole year. My mother tells some of her closest friends, who
tell other friends, and soon the tree is covered in scraps of fabric. Everything is done in
the greatest secrecy; the women ask about loved ones who have died; I listen to the
voice’s answers and pass on the messages. Usually, their loved ones are fine, and on only
two occasions does the girl ask the group to go to a nearby hill at sunrise and say a
wordless prayer for the souls of those people. Apparently, I sometimes go into a trance,
fall to the ground, and babble incomprehensibly, but I can never remember anything
about it. I only know that when I am about to go into a trance, I feel a warm wind
blowing and see bubbles of light all around me.
“One day, when I am taking a group to meet the little girl, we are prevented from doing
so by the police. The women protest and shout, but we cannot get through. I am escorted
to school, where the headmaster informs me that I have just been expelled for provoking
rebellion and encouraging superstition.
“On the way back, I see that the tree has been cut down and the ribbons scattered on the
ground. I sit down alone and weep, because those had been the happiest days of my life.
At that moment, the girl reappears. She tells me not to worry, that this was all part of the
plan, even the destruction of the tree, and that she will accompany me now for the rest of
my days and will always tell me what I must do.”

“Did she never tell you her name?” asks one of the beggars.
“Never. But it doesn’t matter because I always know when she’s talking to me.”
“Could we find out something about our dead?”
“No. That only happened during one particular period. Now my mission is different. May
I go on with my story?”
“Absolutely,” I say. “But can I just ask one thing? There’s a town in southwest France
called Lourdes. A long time ago, a shepherdess saw a little girl, who seems to correspond
to your vision.”
“No, you’re wrong,” says one of the older beggars, who has an artificial leg. “The
shepherdess, whose name was Bernadette, saw the Virgin Mary.”
“I’ve written a book about her visions and I had to study the matter closely,” I say. “I
read everything that was published about it at the end of the nineteenth century; I had
access to Bernadette’s many statements to the police, to the church, and to scholars. At no
point does she say that she saw a woman; she insists it was a girl. She repeated the same
story all her life and was deeply angered by the statue that was placed in the grotto; she
said it bore no resemblance to her vision, because she had seen a little girl, not a woman.
Nevertheless, the church appropriated the story, the visions, and the place and
transformed the apparition into the Mother of Jesus, and the truth was forgotten. If a lie is
repeated often enough, it ends up convincing everyone. The only difference is that ‘the
little girl’—as Bernadette always referred to her—had a name.”
“What was it?” asks Mikhail.
“‘I am the Immaculate Conception.’ Obviously that isn’t a name like Beatriz or Maria or
Isabelle. She describes herself as a fact, an event, a happening, which is sometimes
translated as ‘I am birth without sex.’ Now, please, go on with your story.”
“Before he does, can I ask you something?” says another beggar, who must be about my
age. “You just said that you’ve written a book; what’s the title?”
“I’ve written many books.”
And I tell him the title of the book in which I mention the story of Bernadette and her
vision.
“So you’re the husband of the journalist?”
“Are you Esther’s husband?” asks a female beggar, wide-eyed; she is dressed garishly, in
a green hat and a purple coat.
I don’t know what to say.
“Why hasn’t she been back here?” asks someone else. “I hope she isn’t dead. She was
always going to such dangerous places. I often told her she shouldn’t. Look what she
gave me!”
And she shows me a scrap of bloodstained fabric, part of the dead soldier’s shirt.
“No, she’s not dead,” I say. “But I’m surprised to hear that she used to come here.”
“Why? Because we’re different?”
“No, you misunderstand me. I’m not judging you. I’m surprised and pleased to know that
she did.”
However, the vodka we have been drinking to ward off the cold is having an effect on all
of us.
“Now you’re being ironic,” says a burly man with long hair, who looks as if he hasn’t
shaved for several days. “If you think you’re in such bad company, why don’t you leave.”
I have been drinking too and that gives me courage.
“Who are you? What kind of life is this? You’re healthy, you could work, but instead you
prefer to hang around doing nothing!”
“We choose to stay outside, outside a world that is fast collapsing, outside people who
live in constant fear of losing something, who walk along the street as if everything was
fine, when, in fact, everything is bad, very bad indeed! Don’t you beg too? Don’t you ask
for alms from your boss to pay the owner of your apartment?”
“Aren’t you ashamed to be wasting your life?” asks the woman in the purple coat.
“Who said I’m wasting my life? I do precisely what I want to do.”
The burly man interrupts, saying:
“And what is it you want? To live on top of the world? Who told you that the mountain is
necessarily better than the plain? You think we don’t know how to live, don’t you? Well,
your wife understood that we know exactly what we want from life. Do you know what
we want? Peace! Freedom! And not to be obliged to follow the latest fashions—we make
our own fashions here! We drink when we want to and sleep whenever we feel like it!
Not one person here chose slavery and we’re proud of it, even though you and people like
you may think we’re just a lot of pathetic freeloaders!”
The voices are beginning to grow aggressive. Mikhail steps in:
“Do you want to hear the rest of my story or shall we leave now?”
“He’s criticizing us!” says the man with the artificial leg. “He came here to judge us, as if
he were God!”
There are a few more rumbles of complaint, someone slaps me on the back, I offer
around my cigarettes, the bottle of vodka is placed in my hand again. People gradually
calm down, and I am still surprised and shocked that these people knew Esther,
apparently better than I did, since she gave them—and not me—a piece of that
bloodstained shirt.
Mikhail goes on with his story.
“Since I have nowhere to go and study and I’m still too young to look after horses—
which are the pride of our region and our country—I become a shepherd. During the first
week, one of the sheep dies and a rumor goes around that I’m cursed, that I’m the son of
a man who came from far away and promised my mother great wealth, then ended up
leaving us nothing. The Communists may have told them that religion is just a way of
giving false hopes to the desperate, they may all have been brought up to believe that
only reality exists and that anything our eyes can’t see is just the fruit of the human
imagination; but the ancient traditions of the steppes remain untouched and are passed by
word of mouth across the generations.
“Now that the tree has been felled, I no longer see the little girl, although I still hear her
voice. I ask her to help me in tending the flocks, and she tells me to be patient; there are
difficult times ahead, but before I am twenty-two a woman from far away will come and
carry me off to see the world. She also tells me that I have a mission to fulfill, and that
mission is to spread the true energy of love throughout the world.
“The owner of the sheep is worried by the increasingly wild rumors. Oddly, the people
spreading these rumors and trying to destroy my life are the very people whom the little
girl had helped during the whole of the previous year. One day, he decides to go to the
Communist Party office in the next village, where he learns that both I and my mother are
considered to be enemies of the people. I am immediately dismissed. Not that this greatly
affects our life, because my mother does embroidery for a company in the largest city in
the region and there no one knows that we are enemies of the people and of the working
classes; all the factory owners want is for her to continue working on her embroidery
from dawn to dusk.
“I now have all the time in the world and so I wander the steppes with the hunters, who
know my story and believe that I have magical powers, because they always find foxes
when I’m around. I spend whole days at the museum of the poet, studying his
possessions, reading his books, listening to the people who come there to recite his
verses. Now and then, I feel the warm wind blowing, see the lights, and fall to the
ground, and then the voice tells me concrete facts—when the next drought will come,
when the animals will fall sick, when the traders will arrive. I tell no one except my
mother, who is becoming ever more anxious and concerned about me.
“One day, she takes me to see a doctor who is visiting the area. After listening attentively
to my story, taking notes, peering into my eyes with a strange instrument, listening to my
heart, and tapping my knee, he diagnoses a form of epilepsy. He says it isn’t contagious
and that the attacks will diminish with age.
“I know it isn’t an illness, but I pretend to believe him so as to reassure my mother. The
director of the museum, who notices me struggling to learn, takes pity on me and
becomes my teacher. With him I learn geography and literature and the one thing that
will prove vital to me in the future: English. One afternoon, the voice asks me to tell the
director that he will shortly be offered an important post. When I tell him this, all I hear is
a timid laugh and a firm response: there isn’t the remotest chance of this ever happening
because not only has he never been a Party member, he is a devout Muslim.
“I am fifteen years old. Two months after this conversation, I sense that something is
changing in the region. The normally arrogant civil servants are suddenly much kinder
and ask if I would like to go back to school. Great convoys of Russian soldiers head off
to the frontier. One evening, while I am studying in the little office that once belonged to
the poet, the director comes running in and looks at me with a mixture of alarm and
embarrassment. He tells me that the one thing he could never imagine happening—the
collapse of the Communist regime—is happening right now, and with incredible speed.
The former Soviet republics are becoming independent countries; the news from Almaty
is all about the formation of a new government, and he has been appointed to govern the
province!
“Instead of joyfully embracing me, he asks me how I knew this was going to happen. Had
I overheard someone talking about it? Had I been engaged by the secret services to spy
on him because he did not belong to the Party? Or—worst of all—had I, at some point in
my life, made a pact with the devil?
“I remind him that he knows my story: the little girl, the voice, the attacks that allow me
to hear things that other people do not know. He says this is just part of my illness; there
is only one prophet, Mohammed, and everything that needed to be said has already been
revealed. This, he goes on, does not mean that the devil is not still abroad in the world,
using all kinds of tricks—including a supposed ability to foresee the future—to deceive
the weak and lure people away from the true faith. He had given me a job because Islam
demands that we should be charitable, but now he deeply regretted it: I am clearly either
a tool of the secret services or an envoy of the devil.
“He dismisses me there and then.
“Life had not been easy before and it now becomes harder still. The factory for which my
mother works, and which once belonged to the government, falls into private hands, and
the new owners have very different ideas; they restructure the whole business and she,
too, is dismissed. Two months later, we have nothing to live on, and all that remains for
us is to leave the village where I have spent my whole life and go in search of work.
“My grandparents refuse to leave; they would rather die of hunger on the land where they
were born and have spent their entire lives. My mother and I go to Almaty and I see my
first big city: I am amazed at the cars, the huge buildings, the neon signs, the escalators
and—above all—the elevators. My mother gets a job in a shop and I go to work at a
garage as a trainee mechanic. Much of the money we earn is sent back to my
grandparents, but there is enough left over for us to be able to eat and for me to see things
I have never seen before: films, fairs, and football games.
“When we move to the city, my attacks vanish, but so does the voice and the little girl’s
presence. It’s better that way, I decide. I am too fascinated by Almaty and too busy
earning a living to miss the invisible friend who has been my companion since I was
eight years old; I realize that all it takes to become someone in the world is a little
intelligence. Then, one Sunday night, I am sitting at our small apartment’s only window,
which looks out onto a small dirt alleyway. I am very worried because, the day before, I
dented a car as I was maneuvering it inside the garage and am so frightened I might get
the sack that I haven’t eaten all day.
“Suddenly, I feel the warm wind and see the lights. According to my mother, I fell to the
floor and spoke in a strange language and the trance seemed to last longer than usual. I
remember that it was then that the voice reminded me of my mission. When I come to, I
can feel the presence of the little girl again, and although I cannot see her, I can talk to
her.
“A change of home has meant a change of worlds too, and I am no longer interested in all
this. Nevertheless, I ask her what my mission is: the voice tells me that it is the mission
shared by all human beings—to fill the world with the energy of total love. I ask about
the one thing that is really worrying me at that precise moment: the dented car and the
owner’s reaction. She tells me not to worry, just tell the truth and he will understand.
“I work at the garage for five more years. I make friends, have my first girlfriends,
discover sex, get involved in street fights; in short, I have an entirely normal adolescence.
I have a few fits and, at first, my friends are surprised, but then I invent some story about
being in possession of ‘higher powers’ and this earns me their respect. They ask for my
help, consult me when they have problems with their girlfriends or with their families,
but I never ask the voice for advice—the traumatic experience of seeing the tree cut down
all those years ago has made me realize that when you help someone you get only
ingratitude in return.
“If my friends probe further, I tell them I belong to a ‘secret society.’ After decades of
religious repression in Kazakhstan, mysticism and the esoteric are now very fashionable
in Almaty. Books are published about people with so-called higher powers, about gurus
and teachers from India and China; courses of self-improvement abound. I go to a few,
but realize that I have nothing to learn. The only thing I really trust is the voice, but I am
too busy to pay attention to what it is saying.
“One day, a woman in a four-wheel drive stops at the garage where I work and asks me
to fill up the tank. She addresses me in halting, heavily accented Russian, and I respond
in English. She seems relieved and asks if I know of an interpreter who could go with her
into the interior of Kazakhstan.
“The moment she says this, the little girl’s presence fills the whole place, and I
understand that this is the person I have been waiting for all my life. She is my way out,
and I must not miss this opportunity. I tell her that, if she wants, I can be her interpreter.
She says that I obviously have a job already and, besides, she needs someone older, more
experienced, someone who is free to travel. I say that I know every path in the steppes
and the mountains, and I lie, saying that the job I have is only temporary. I beg her to
give me a chance; reluctantly, she arranges to meet me later in the city’s most luxurious
hotel.
“We meet in the lounge; she tests my knowledge of English, asks a series of questions
about the geography of Central Asia, wants to know who I am and where I come from.
She is suspicious and will not say exactly what she does or where she wants to go. I try to
play my part as best I can, but I can see she’s not convinced.
“And I am surprised to realize that, for no apparent reason, I am in love with her, with
this woman I have only known for a matter of hours. I control my anxiety and once more
place my trust in the voice. I plead for help from the invisible girl and ask her to
enlighten me; I promise that, if I get this job, I will carry out the mission entrusted to me;
she had told me that one day a woman would come and take me far away from there; she
had been there with me when the woman stopped to fill her tank; I need a positive
response.
“After Esther’s intense questioning, I sense that I am beginning to win her confidence;
she warns me that what she wants to do is completely illegal. She explains that she is a
journalist and wants to write an article about the American bases being built in a
neighboring country in preparation for a war that is about to begin. Her application for a
visa has been turned down and so we will have to travel on foot, crossing the border at
points where there are no guards. Her contacts have given her a map and shown her
where it is safe to cross, but she says she will reveal none of this until we are far from
Almaty. If I want to go with her, I must be at the hotel in two days’ time at eleven o’clock
in the morning. She promises me only a week’s wages, unaware that I have a permanent
job, earn enough to help out my mother and my grandparents, and that my boss trusts me
despite having been witness to several of the convulsive attacks—what he calls my
“epileptic fits”—that always accompany my contacts with the unknown world.
“Before saying goodbye, the woman tells me her name—Esther—and warns me that if I
go to the police to report her, she will be arrested and deported. She also says that there
are moments in life when we need to trust blindly in intuition, which is what she is doing
now. I tell her not to worry. I feel tempted to say something about the voice and the
presence, but decide against it. I go home, talk to my mother, and tell her I’ve found a
new job as an interpreter, which is better paid but will involve me going away for a
while. She doesn’t seem in the least concerned; everything around me is developing as if
it had long been planned and we were all just waiting for the right moment.
“I sleep badly and the following day I arrive earlier than usual at the garage. I tell my
boss that I’m sorry, but I’ve found a new job. He says that, sooner or later, they’ll find
out about my illness, that it’s very risky giving up steady employment for something less
certain, but, just as happened with my mother, he makes no real fuss about letting me go,
as if the voice were manipulating the minds of all the people I have to talk to that day,
facilitating things, helping me take the first step.
“When Esther and I meet at the hotel, I tell her: ‘If we’re caught, you’ll just be deported
but I’ll get put in prison, possibly for many years. Since I’m running the greater risk, you
really ought to trust me.’ She seems to understand what I’m saying. We walk for two
days; a group of men are waiting for her on the other side of the frontier; she goes off
with them and returns shortly afterward, frustrated and angry. The war is about to start,
all the roads are being guarded, and it’s impossible to go any farther without being
arrested as a spy.
“We start the journey back. The usually self-confident Esther seems suddenly sad and
confused. To distract her, I recite some lines written by the poet who used to live close to
my village, at the same time thinking that in forty-eight hours this whole experience will
be over. However, I prefer to trust in the voice. I must do everything I can to prevent
Esther leaving as suddenly as she came; perhaps I should show her that I have always
been waiting for her, that she is important to me.
“That night, after rolling out our sleeping bags near some rocks, I reach out and touch her
hand. She gently pulls back, saying that she’s married. I realize that I have made a foolish
blunder; then, since I now have nothing to lose, I tell her about the visions I had as a
child, about my mission to spread love throughout the world, about the doctor’s diagnosis
of epilepsy.
“To my surprise, she understands exactly what I’m talking about. She tells me a little
about her life. She says that she loves her husband and that he loves her, but that, with the
passing of time, something important has been lost, and she prefers now to be far away
from him, rather than watch her marriage slowly disintegrate. She had everything in life,
and yet she was unhappy; although she could easily go through the rest of her life
pretending that this unhappiness didn’t exist, she was terrified of falling into a depression
from which she might never emerge.
“That is why she decided to give up everything and go in search of adventure, in search
of things that leave her no time to think about a love that is dying. However, the more she
looked, the more confused she became, the more alone she felt. She feels she has
completely lost her way, and the experience we have just had seems to be telling her that
she is on the wrong track and should go back to her daily routine.
“I suggest trying a less closely guarded trail, say that I know smugglers in Almaty who
could help us, but she seems to have no energy, no will to go on.
“At that moment, the voice tells me to bless Esther and to dedicate her to the earth.
Without really knowing what I am doing, I get up, open my backpack, dip my fingers in
the small bottle of oil we have taken with us for cooking, place my hand on her head and
pray in silence, asking, at the end, that she continue her search, because it is important for
all of us. The voice is telling me—and I repeat the words out loud to her—that if just one
person changes, the whole human race is changed. She puts her arms around me, and I
can feel the earth blessing her, and we stay like that together for several hours.
“Afterward, I ask if she believes what I told her about the voice. She says that she both
does and doesn’t. She believes that we all have a power that we never use and that I have
clearly come into contact with that power through my epileptic fits, but this is something
we can find out about together. She has been thinking of interviewing a nomad who lives
to the north of Almaty and who is said by everyone to have magical powers. I am
welcome to accompany her. When she tells me the man’s name, I realize that I know his
grandson and that this could greatly facilitate matters.
“We drive through Almaty, stopping only to fill the tank with gas and buy some food,
then we drive on in the direction of a tiny village near an artificial lake constructed by the
Soviet regime. I find out where the nomad is staying, but despite telling one of his
assistants that I know the man’s grandson, we still have to wait many hours, for there is a
large crowd wanting the advice of this man they consider to be a saint.
“At last, we are ushered in. By acting as interpreter at that interview and by reading and
rereading Esther’s article when it was published, I learn several things I needed to know.
“Esther asks why people are sad.
“‘That’s simple,’ says the old man. ‘They are the prisoners of their personal history.
Everyone believes that the main aim in life is to follow a plan. They never ask if that plan
is theirs or if it was created by another person. They accumulate experiences, memories,
things, other people’s ideas, and it is more than they can possibly cope with. And that is
why they forget their dreams.’
“Esther remarks that many people say to her, ‘You’re lucky, you know what you want
from life, whereas I don’t even know what I want to do.’
“‘Of course they know,’ replies the nomad. ‘How many people do you know who say:
I’ve never done what I wanted, but then, that’s life. If they say they haven’t done what
they wanted, then, at some point, they must have known what it was that they did want.
As for life, it’s just a story that other people tell us about the world and about how we
should behave in the world.’
“‘Even worse are those people who say: I’m happy because I’m sacrificing my life for
those I love.’
“‘And do you think that the people who love us want to see us suffering for their sakes?
Do you think that love is a source of suffering?’
“‘To be honest, yes.’
“‘Well, it shouldn’t be.’
“‘If I forget the story other people have told me, I’ll also forget a lot of very important
things life has taught me. What was the point of struggling to learn so much? What was
the point of struggling to gain experience, so as to be able to deal with my career, my
husband, my various crises?’
“‘Accumulated knowledge is useful when it comes to cooking or living within your
means or wrapping up warm in winter or respecting certain limits or knowing where
particular bus and train lines go. Do you believe that your past loves have taught you to
love better?’
“‘They’ve taught me to know what I want.’
“‘I didn’t ask that. Have your past loves taught you to love your husband better?’
“‘No, on the contrary. In order to surrender myself to him, I had to forget all the scars left
by other men. Is that what you mean?’
“‘In order for the true energy of love to penetrate your soul, your soul must be as if you
had just been born. Why are people unhappy? Because they want to imprison that energy,
which is impossible. Forgetting your personal history means leaving that channel clear,
allowing that energy to manifest itself each day in whatever way it chooses, allowing
yourself to be guided by it.’
“‘That’s all very romantic, but very difficult too, because that energy gets blocked by all
kinds of things: commitments, children, your social situation…’
“‘…and, after a while, by despair, fear, loneliness, and your attempts to control the
uncontrollable. According to the tradition of the steppes—which is known as the
Tengri—in order to live fully, it is necessary to be in constant movement; only then can
each day be different from the last. When they passed through cities, the nomads would
think: The poor people who live here, for them everything is always the same. The people
in the cities probably looked at the nomads and thought: Poor things, they have nowhere
to live. The nomads had no past, only the present, and that is why they were always
happy, until the Communist governors made them stop traveling and forced them to live
on collective farms. From then on, little by little, they came to believe that the story
society told them was true. Consequently, they have lost all their strength.’
“‘No one nowadays can spend their whole life traveling.’
“‘Not physically, no, but they can on a spiritual plane. Going farther and farther,
distancing yourself from your personal history, from what you were forced to become.’
“‘How does one go about abandoning the story one was told?’
“‘By repeating it out loud in meticulous detail. And as we tell our story, we say goodbye
to what we were and, as you’ll see if you try, we create space for a new, unknown world.
We repeat the old story over and over until it is no longer important to us.’
“‘Is that all?’
“‘There is just one other thing: as those spaces grow, it is important to fill them up
quickly, even if only provisionally, so as not to be left with a feeling of emptiness.’
“‘How?’
“‘With different stories, with experiences we never dared to have or didn’t want to have.
That is how we change. That is how love grows. And when love grows, we grow with it.’
“‘Does that mean we might lose things that are important?’
“‘Never. The important things always stay; what we lose are the things we thought were
important but which are, in fact, useless, like the false power we use to control the energy
of love.’
“The old man tells her that her time is up and that he has other people to see. Despite my
pleas he proves inflexible, but tells Esther that if she ever comes back, he will teach her
more.”

“Esther is only staying in Almaty for another week, but promises to return. During that
time, I tell her my story over and over and she tells me hers, and we see that the old man
is right: something is leaving us, we are lighter, although we could not really say that we
are any happier.
“The old man had given us another piece of advice: fill that space up quickly. Before she
leaves, she asks if I would like to go to France so that we can continue this process of
forgetting. She has no one with whom she can share all this; she can’t talk to her
husband; she doesn’t trust the people she works with; she needs someone from outside,
from far away, who has, up until then, had nothing to do with her personal history.
“I say that I would like to do that and only then mention what the voice had prophesied. I
also tell her that I don’t know French and that my only work experience so far has been
tending sheep and working in a garage.
“At the airport, she asks me to take an intensive course in French. I ask her why she
wants me to go to France. She repeats what she has said and admits she’s afraid of the
space opening up around her as she erases her personal history; she’s afraid that
everything will rush back in more intensely than before, and then there will be no way of
freeing herself from her past. She tells me not to worry about buying a ticket or getting a
visa; she will take care of everything. Before going through passport control, she looks at
me, smiles, and says that, although she may not have known it, she had been waiting for
me as well. The days we had spent together had been the happiest she had known in the
last three years.
“I start working at night, as a bouncer at a striptease joint, and during the day I devote
myself to learning French. Oddly enough, the attacks diminish, but the presence also goes
away. I tell my mother that I’ve been invited to go abroad, and she tells me not to be so
naive, I’ll never hear from the woman again.
“A year later, Esther returns to Almaty. The expected war has begun, and someone else
has written an article about the secret American bases, but Esther’s interview with the old
man had been a great success and now she has been asked to write a long article on the
disappearance of the nomads. ‘Apart from that,’ she said, ‘it’s been ages since I told my
story to anyone and I’m starting to get depressed.’
“I help put her in touch with the few tribes who still travel, with the Tengri tradition, and
with local shamans. I am now fluent in French, and over supper she gives me various
forms from the consulate to fill in, gets me a visa, buys me a ticket, and I come to Paris.
We both notice that, as we empty our minds of old stories, a new space opens up, a
mysterious feeling of joy slips in, our intuitions grow sharper, we become braver, take
more risks, do things which might be right or which might be wrong, we can’t be sure,
but we do them anyway. The days seem longer and more intense.
“When I arrive in Paris, I ask where I’m going to work, but she has already made plans:
she has persuaded the owner of a bar to allow me to appear there once a week, telling him
that I specialize in an exotic kind of performance art from Kazakhstan which consists of
encouraging people to talk about their lives and to empty their minds.
“At first, it is very difficult to get the sparse audience to join in, but the drunks enjoy it
and word spreads. ‘Come and tell your old story and discover a new one,’ says the small
handwritten notice in the window, and people, thirsty for novelty, start to come.
“One night, I experience something strange: it is not me on the small improvised stage in
one corner of the bar, it is the presence. And instead of telling stories from my own
country and then moving on to suggest that they tell their stories, I merely say what the
voice tells me to. Afterward, one of the spectators is crying and speaks about his marriage
in intimate detail to the other strangers there.
“The same thing happens the following week—the voice speaks for me, asking people to
tell stories not about love, but about the lack of love, and the energy in the air is so
different that the normally discreet French begin discussing their personal lives in public.
I am also managing to control my attacks better; if, when I’m on stage, I start to see the
lights or feel that warm wind, I immediately go into a trance, lose consciousness, and no
one notices. I only have ‘epileptic fits’ at moments when I am under great nervous strain.
“Other people join the group. Three young men the same age as me, who had nothing to
do but travel the world—the nomads of the Western world; and a couple of musicians
from Kazakhstan, who have heard about their fellow countryman’s ‘success,’ ask if they
can join the show, since they are unable to find work elsewhere. We include percussion
instruments in the performance. The bar is becoming too small, and we find a room in the
restaurant where we currently appear; but now we are starting to outgrow that space too,
because when people tell their stories, they feel braver; when they dance, they are
touched by the energy and begin to change radically; love—which, in theory, should be
threatened by all these changes—becomes stronger, and they recommend our meetings to
their friends.
“Esther continues traveling in order to write her articles, but always comes to the
meetings when she is in Paris. One night, she tells me that our work at the restaurant is no
longer enough; it only reaches those people who have the money to go there. We need to
work with the young. Where will we find them, I ask? They drift, travel, abandon
everything, and dress as beggars or characters out of sci-fi movies.
“She says that beggars have no personal history, so why don’t we go to them and see
what we can learn. And that is how I came to meet all of you.
“These are the things I have experienced. You have never asked me who I am or what I
do, because you’re not interested. But today, because we have a famous writer in our
midst, I decided to tell you.”
“But you’re talking about your past,” said the woman in the clashing hat and coat. “Even
though the old nomad…”
“What’s a nomad?” someone asks.
“People like us,” she responds, proud to know the meaning of the word. “People who are
free and manage to live with only what they can carry.”
I correct her:
“That’s not quite true. They’re not poor.”
“What do you know about poverty?” The tall, aggressive man, who now has even more
vodka in his veins, looks straight at me. “Do you really think that poverty has to do with
having no money? Do you think we’re miserable wretches just because we go around
begging money from rich writers and guilt-ridden couples, from tourists who think how
terribly squalid Paris has become or from idealistic young people who think they can save
the world? You’re the one who’s poor—you have no control over your time, you can’t do
what you want, you’re forced to follow rules you didn’t invent and which you don’t
understand…”
Mikhail again interrupted the conversation and asked the woman:
“What did you actually want to know?”
“I wanted to know why you’re telling us your story when the old nomad said you should
forget it.”
“It’s not my story anymore: whenever I speak about the past now, I feel as if I were
talking about something that has nothing to do with me. All that remains in the present
are the voice, the presence, and the importance of fulfilling my mission. I don’t regret the
difficulties I experienced; I think they helped me to become the person I am today. I feel
the way a warrior must feel after years of training: he doesn’t remember the details of
everything he learned, but he knows how to strike when the time is right.”
“And why did you and that journalist keep coming to visit us?”
“To take nourishment. As the old nomad from the steppes said, the world we know today
is merely a story someone has told to us, but it is not the true story. The other story
includes special gifts and powers and the ability to go beyond what we know. I have lived
with the presence ever since I was a child and, for a time, was even capable of seeing her,
but Esther showed me that I was not alone. She introduced me to other people with
special gifts, people who could bend forks by sheer force of will, or carry out surgery
using rusty penknives and without anaesthesia, so that the patient could get up after the
operation and leave.
“I am still learning to develop my unknown potential, but I need allies, people like you
who have no personal history.”
I felt like telling my story to these strangers too, in order to begin the process of freeing
myself from the past, but it was late and I had to get up early the next day to see the
doctor and have him remove the orthopedic collar.

I asked Mikhail if he wanted a lift, but he said no, he needed to walk a little, because he
felt Esther’s absence particularly acutely that night. We left the group and headed for a
street where I would be able to find a taxi.
“I think that woman was right,” I said. “If you tell a story, then that means you’re still not
really free of it.”
“I am free, but, as I’m sure you’ll understand, therein lies the secret; there are always
some stories that are ‘interrupted,’ and they are the stories that remain nearest to the
surface and so still occupy the present; only when we close that story or chapter can we
begin the next one.”
I remembered reading something similar on the Internet; it was attributed to me, although
I didn’t write it:

That is why it is so important to let certain things go. To release them. To cut loose.
People need to understand that no one is playing with marked cards; sometimes we win
and sometimes we lose. Don’t expect to get anything back, don’t expect recognition for
your efforts, don’t expect your genius to be discovered or your love to be understood.
Complete the circle. Not out of pride, inability, or arrogance, but simply because
whatever it is no longer fits in your life. Close the door, change the record, clean the
house, get rid of the dust. Stop being who you were and become who you are.

But I had better find out what Mikhail means.
“What are ‘interrupted stories’?”
“Esther isn’t here. She reached a point where she could go no further in the process of
emptying herself of unhappiness and allowing joy to flow in. Why? Because her story,
like that of millions of other people, is bound up with the energy of love. It can’t evolve
on its own: she must either stop loving or wait until her beloved comes to her.
“In failed marriages, when one person stops walking, the other is forced to do the same.
And while he or she is waiting, other lovers appear, or there is charitable work to get
involved in, there are the children to worry about, there are long hours at the office, etc. It
would be much easier to talk openly about things, to insist, to yell: ‘Let’s move on, we’re
dying of tedium, anxiety, fear.’”
“Are you telling me that Esther can’t continue with the process of freeing herself from
sadness because of me?”
“No, that’s not what I meant. I don’t believe that one person can blame another, under
any circumstances. All I said was that she has a choice between stopping loving you or
making you come to her.”
“That’s what she’s doing.”
“I know, but, if it were up to me, we would only go to her when the voice allows us to.”

Right, this should be the last you see of the orthopedic collar. I certainly hope so
anyway. But, please, avoid making any sudden movements. Your muscles need to get
used to working on their own again. By the way, what happened to the girl who made
those predictions?”
“What girl? What predictions?”
“Didn’t you tell me at the hospital that someone had claimed to hear a voice warning that
something was going to happen to you?”
“Oh, it wasn’t a girl. And you said you were going to find out about epilepsy for me.”
“Yes, I got in touch with a specialist and asked him if he knew of any such cases. His
answer surprised me a bit, but let me just remind you that medicine has its mysteries. Do
you remember the story I told you about the boy who goes out to buy five apples and
returns with two?”
“Yes, and how he might have lost them or given them away, or else they might have
turned out to be more expensive than expected, etc. Don’t worry, I know there are no
absolute answers. But, first, did Joan of Arc suffer from epilepsy?”
“Oddly enough, my friend mentioned her during our conversation. Joan of Arc started
hearing voices when she was thirteen. Her statements reveal that she saw lights, which is
one of the symptoms of an attack. According to the neurologist, Dr. Lydia Bayne, the
warrior-saint’s ecstatic experiences were caused by what we now call musicogenic
epilepsy, which is provoked by hearing a particular kind of sound or music: in Joan’s
case, it was the sound of bells. Were you there when the boy had a fit?”
“Yes.”
“Was there any music playing?”
“I can’t remember. But even if there was, the clatter of cutlery and the buzz of
conversation would have drowned it out.”
“Did he seem tense?”
“Yes, very.”
“That’s another thing that can provoke an attack. Epilepsy has been around for longer
than you might think. In Mesopotamia, there are remarkably accurate descriptions of
what they called ‘the falling sickness,’ which was followed by convulsions. Ancient
people believed that it was caused by demons invading a person’s body; only much later
on did the Greek Hippocrates relate these convulsions to some dysfunction of the brain.
Even so, epileptics are still the victims of prejudice.”
“I’m sure. I was absolutely terrified when it happened.”
“You mentioned the word prophecy, and so I asked my friend to concentrate his
researches in that area. According to him, most scientists agree that, although a lot of
famous people have suffered from epilepsy, the disease itself does not confer greater or
lesser powers on anyone. Nevertheless, the more famous epileptics did succeed in
persuading other people to see their fits as having a mystical aura.”
“Give me an example of some famous epileptics.”
“Napoleon, Alexander the Great, Dante…I didn’t make a full list, since what you were
interested in was the boy’s prophecy. What’s his name, by the way?”
“You don’t know him, and since you’ve nearly always got another appointment to go to,
perhaps you’d better just finish your explanation.”
“All right. Medical scientists who study the Bible are sure that the apostle Paul was an
epileptic. They base this on the fact that, on the road to Damascus, he saw a brilliant light
near him which caused him to fall to the ground, leaving him temporarily blind and
unable to eat or drink for some days. In medical terms, this is known as ‘temporal lobe
epilepsy.’”
“I don’t think the church would agree.”
“I’m not even sure that I agree, but that’s what the medical literature says. Other
epileptics develop their self-destructive side, as was the case with van Gogh. He
described his convulsions as ‘the storm within.’ In Saint-Rémy, where he was a patient,
one of the nurses saw him having a convulsive seizure.”
“At least he managed in his paintings to transform his self-destruction into a
reconstruction of the world.”
“Some people suspect that Lewis Carroll wrote Alice in Wonderland in order to describe
his own experiences of epilepsy. The story at the beginning of the book, when Alice falls
down a black hole, is an experience familiar to most epileptics. During her journey
through Wonderland, Alice often sees things flying and she herself feels very light—
another very precise description of the effects of an epileptic attack.”
“So it would seem epileptics have a propensity for art.”
“Not at all, it’s just that because artists tend to become famous, art and epilepsy become
linked in people’s minds. Literature is full of examples of writers with a suspected or
confirmed diagnosis of epilepsy: Molière, Edgar Allan Poe, Flaubert…. Dostoevsky had
his first attack when he was nine years old, and said that it brought him moments when he
felt utterly at peace with the world as well as moments of terrible depression. Don’t take
all of this too seriously, and don’t go thinking that you might develop epilepsy because of
your accident. I haven’t come across a single case of epilepsy being caused by colliding
with a motorbike.”
“As I said, this is someone I actually know.”
“Does the boy with the predictions really exist or did you invent all this simply because
you think you might have passed out when you stepped off the pavement?”
“On the contrary, I hate knowing about illnesses. Whenever I read a medical book, I
immediately start to get all the symptoms.”
“Let me tell you something, but please don’t take it the wrong way. I think this accident
did you a lot of good. You seem calmer, less obsessed. A brush with death always helps
us to live our lives better; that’s what your wife told me when she gave me a bit of
bloodstained fabric, which I always carry with me, even though, as a doctor, I see death,
close to, every day.”
“Did she say why she gave you the cloth?”
“She was very generous in her description of my work. She said that I was capable of
combining technique with intuition, discipline with love. She told me that a soldier,
before he died, had asked her to take his blood-soaked shirt, cut it into pieces, and share
those pieces among people who were genuinely trying to reveal the world as it is. I
imagine you, with all your books, must also have a bit of this shirt.”
“No, I haven’t.”
“Do you know why?”
“I do, or, rather, I’m beginning to find out.”
“And since I’m not only your doctor, but your friend, may I give you some advice? If this
epileptic boy did tell you that he can foresee the future, then he knows nothing about
medicine.”

Zagreb, Croatia. 6:30 a.m.
Marie and I are sitting by a frozen fountain. It appears that, this year, spring has decided
not to happen; indeed, it looks as if we will jump straight from winter into summer. In the
middle of the fountain stands a column with a statue on top.
I have spent the entire afternoon giving interviews and cannot bear to say another word
about my new book. The journalists all ask the usual questions: Has my wife read the
book (I don’t know)? Do I feel I’ve been unfairly treated by the critics (what?)? Has A
Time to Rend and a Time to Sew shocked my readers at all, given that I reveal a great deal
about my personal life (a writer can only write about his own life)? Will the book be
made into a film (I repeat for the nth time that the film happens in the reader’s mind and
that I have forbidden the sale of film rights on any of my books)? What do I think about
love? Why did I choose to write about love? How can one be happy in love, love, love,
love?…
Once the interviews are over, there’s the publisher’s supper—it’s part of the ritual. The
table is packed with local worthies who keep interrupting me just as I’m about to put my
fork in my mouth, and usually ask the same thing: “Where do you find your inspiration?”
I try to eat, but I must also be pleasant, I must chat, fulfill my role as celebrity, tell a few
interesting stories, make a good impression. I know that the publisher is a real hero,
because he can never tell whether a book will sell or not; he could be selling bananas or
soap instead; it would certainly be easier: they’re not vain, they don’t have inflated egos,
they don’t complain if they don’t like the publicity campaign or if their book doesn’t
appear in a particular bookshop.
After supper, it’s the usual routine: they want to show me their city’s monuments, historic
places, fashionable bars. There is always a guide who knows absolutely everything and
fills my head with information, and I have to look as if I’m really listening and ask the
occasional question just to show interest. I know nearly all the monuments, museums,
and historic places of all the many cities I have visited to promote my work—and I can’t
remember any of them. What I do remember are the unexpected things, the meetings with
readers, the bars, perhaps a street I happened to walk down, where I turned a corner and
came upon something wonderful.
One day, I’m going to write a travel guide containing only maps and addresses of hotels,
and with the rest of the pages blank. That way people will have to make their own
itinerary, to discover for themselves restaurants, monuments, and all the magnificent
things that every city has, but which are never mentioned because “the history we have
been taught” does not include them under the heading Things You Must See.
I’ve been to Zagreb before. And this fountain doesn’t appear in any of the local tourist
guides, but it is far more important to me than anything else I saw here—because it is
pretty, because I discovered it by chance, and because it is linked to a story in my life.
Many years ago, when I was a young man traveling the world in search of adventure, I
sat in this very spot with a Croatian painter who had traveled with me for much of the
journey. I was heading off into Turkey and he was going home. We said goodbye here,
drank two bottles of wine between us, and talked about everything that had happened
while we had been together, about religion, women, music, the price of hotels, drugs. We
talked about everything except love, because although there were people we loved, there
was no need to talk about it.
After the painter had returned to his house, I met a young woman and we spent three days
together and loved each other with great intensity because we both knew that it would not
last very long. She helped me to understand the soul of those people and I never forgot
her, just as I never forgot the fountain or saying goodbye to my traveling companion.
This was why—after the interviews, the autographs, the supper, the visits to monuments
and historic places—I pestered my publishers into bringing me to this fountain. They
asked me where it was, and I had no idea, just as I had no idea that Zagreb had so many
fountains. After nearly an hour of searching, we finally managed to locate it. I asked for a
bottle of wine, we said goodbye to everyone, and Marie and I sat down together in
silence, our arms about each other, drinking wine and waiting for the sun to come up.
“You seem to get happier and happier by the day,” she says, resting her head on my
shoulder.
“That’s because I’m trying to forget who I am. Or rather, I don’t need to carry the weight
of my whole history on my shoulders.”
I tell her about Mikhail’s conversation with the nomad.
“It’s rather like that with actors,” she says. “With each new role, we have to stop being
who we are in order to become the character. We tend to end up confused and neurotic. Is
it such a good idea to abandon your personal history, do you think?”
“Didn’t you say I seemed better?”
“Less egotistical, yes. Although it amused me the way you wouldn’t let us rest until you
found this fountain, but that goes against what you’ve just said, since the fountain is part
of your past.”
“For me, it’s a symbol. But I don’t carry this fountain around with me, I don’t think about
it all the time, I don’t take photos of it to show my friends, I don’t long for the painter or
for the young woman I fell in love with. It’s really good to come back here again, but if I
hadn’t come back, it wouldn’t make any difference to that initial experience.”
“I see what you’re saying.”
“I’m glad.”
“And I’m sad, because it makes me think that you’re about to leave. I’ve known you
would ever since we first met, but it’s still difficult, because I’ve got used to being with
you.”
“That’s the problem, we do get used to things.”
“It’s human too.”
“That’s why the woman I married became the Zahir. Until I had that accident, I had
convinced myself that I could only be happy with her, not because I loved her more than
anything and anyone in the world, but because I thought only she could understand me;
she knew my likes, my eccentricities, my way of seeing the world. I was grateful for what
she had done for me, and I thought she should be grateful for what I had done for her. I
was used to seeing the world through her eyes. Do you remember that story about the two
firemen who emerge from the fire and one has his face all blackened by smoke?”
She sat up straight. I noticed that her eyes were full of tears.
“Well, that is what the world was like for me,” I went on. “A reflection of Esther’s
beauty. Is that love? Or is that dependency?”
“I don’t know. I think love and dependency go hand in hand.”
“Possibly. But let’s suppose that instead of writing A Time to Rend and a Time to Sew,
which is really just a letter to a woman who is far away, I had chosen a different plot, for
example, a husband and wife who have been together for ten years. They used to make
love every day, now they only make love once a week, but that doesn’t really matter
because there is also solidarity, mutual support, companionship. He feels sad when he has
to have supper alone because she is working late. She hates it when he has to go away,
but accepts that it is part of his job. They feel that something is missing, but they are both
grown-ups, they are both mature people, and they know how important it is to keep their
relationship stable, even if only for the children’s sake. They devote more and more time
to work and to the children, they think less and less about their marriage. Everything
appears to be going really well, and there’s certainly no other man or woman in their
lives.
“Yet they sense that something is wrong. They can’t quite put their finger on the
problem. As time passes, they grow more and more dependent on each other; they are
getting older; any opportunities to make a new life are vanishing fast. They try to keep
busy doing reading or embroidery, watching television, seeing friends, but there is always
the conversation over supper or after supper. He is easily irritated, she is more silent than
usual. They can see that they are growing further and further apart, but cannot understand
why. They reach the conclusion that this is what marriage is like, but won’t talk to their
friends about it; they are the image of the happy couple who support each other and share
the same interests. She takes a lover, so does he, but it’s never anything serious, of
course. What is important, necessary, essential, is to act as if nothing is happening,
because it’s too late to change.”
“I know that story, although I’ve never experienced it myself. And I think we spend our
lives being trained to put up with situations like that.”
I take off my coat and climb onto the edge of the fountain. She asks me what I’m doing.
“I’m going to walk over to that column in the middle of the fountain.”
“You’re mad. It’s spring now, the ice will be getting really thin.”
“I need to walk over to the column.”
I place one foot on the surface, the whole sheet of ice moves, but does not crack. With
one eye on the rising sun, I make a kind of wager with God: if I manage to reach the
column and come back without the ice cracking, that will be a sign that I am on the right
path, and that his hand is showing me where I should go.
“You’ll fall in the water.”
“So? The worst that can happen is that I’ll get a bit cold, but the hotel isn’t far away and I
won’t have to suffer for long.”
I put my other foot on the ice: I am now in the fountain. The ice breaks away from the
edges and a little water laps onto the surface of the ice, but the ice does not break. I set
off toward the column. It’s only about four meters there and back, and all I risk is getting
a very cold bath. However, I mustn’t think about what might happen: I’ve taken the first
step and I must continue to the end.
I reach the column, touch it with my hand, hear everything around me creaking, but I’m
still on the ice. My first instinct is to run back, but something tells me that if I do that, my
steps will become heavier, firmer, and I’ll fall into the water. I must walk back slowly, at
the same pace.
The sun is rising ahead of me; it dazzles me slightly. I can see only Marie’s silhouette and
the shapes of the buildings and the trees. The sheet of ice keeps shifting, water spills over
onto the surface, but I know—with absolute certainty—that I will reach the edge. I am in
communion with the day, with my choices. I know the limits of the frozen water; I know
how to deal with it, how to ask for its help, to keep me from falling. I begin to enter a
kind of trance, a euphoric state; I am a child again, doing something that is wrong,
forbidden, but which gives me enormous pleasure. Wonderful! Crazy pacts with God,
along the lines of “If I manage to do this, then so and so will happen,” signs provoked not
by anything that comes from outside, but by instinct, by my capacity to forget the old
rules and create new situations.
I am grateful for having met Mikhail, the epileptic who thinks he can hear voices. I went
to his meeting at the restaurant in search of my wife and discovered that I was turning
into a pale reflection of myself. Is Esther still important? I think so, for it was her love
that changed my life once and which is transforming me now. My history had grown old
and was becoming ever heavier to carry, and far too serious for me ever to take risks like
walking on ice, making a wager with God, forcing a sign to appear. I had forgotten that
one has to continue walking the road to Santiago, to discard any unnecessary baggage, to
keep only what you need in order to live each day, and to allow the energy of love to flow
freely, from the outside in and from the inside out.
Another cracking sound, and a fault line appears across the surface, but I know I will
make it, because I am light, so light that I could even walk on a cloud and not fall to
earth. I am not carrying with me the weight of fame, of stories I have told, of itineraries
to follow. I am so transparent that the sun’s rays can penetrate my body and illumine my
soul. I see that there are still many dark areas inside me, but with perseverance and
courage they will gradually be washed away.
Another step, and I remember the envelope on my desk at home. Soon I will open it and,
instead of walking on ice, I will set off along the path that leads me to Esther. I will do so
not because I want her by my side, for she is free to remain where she is. It is not because
I dream day and night of the Zahir; that loving, destructive obsession seems to have
vanished. It is not because I am used to my past as it was and passionately want to go
back to it.
Another step, more sounds of cracking, but safety and the edge of the fountain are close.
I will open the envelope and go and find her because—as Mikhail, the epileptic, the seer,
the guru of the Armenian restaurant, says—this story needs to reach its end. When
everything has been told and retold countless times, when the places I have visited, the
things I have experienced, the steps I have taken because of her are all transformed into
distant memories, nothing will remain but pure love. I won’t feel as if I owe anything, I
won’t feel that I need her because only she can understand me, because I’m used to her,
because she knows my vices and my virtues, knows that I like to have a slice of toast
before I go to bed and to watch the international news when I wake up, that I have to go
for a walk every morning, or that she knows about my collection of books on archery,
about the hours spent in front of the computer screen, writing, about how annoyed I get
when the maid keeps calling me to tell me the food is on the table.
All that will disappear. What remains will be the love that moves the heavens, the stars,
people, flowers, insects, the love that obliges us all to walk across the ice despite the
danger, that fills us with joy and with fear, and gives meaning to everything.
I touch the edge of the fountain, a hand reaches out to me, I grab hold of it, and Marie
helps to steady me as I step down.
“I’m proud of you. I would never do anything like that.”
“Not so long ago, I wouldn’t have either; it seems so childish, irresponsible, unnecessary,
pointless. But I am being reborn and I need to take new risks.”
“The morning light is obviously good for you; you’re talking like a wise man.”
“No wise man would do what I’ve just done.”

I have to write an important article for a magazine that is one of my major creditors in
the Favor Bank. I have hundreds, thousands of ideas in my head, but I don’t know which
of them merits my effort, my concentration, my blood.
It is not the first time this has happened, but I feel as if I have said everything of
importance that I need to say. I feel as if I’m losing my memory and forgetting who I am.
I go over to the window and look out at the street. I try to convince myself that I am
professionally fulfilled and have nothing more to prove, that I can justifiably withdraw to
a house in the mountains and spend the rest of my life reading, walking, and talking about
food and the weather. I tell myself over and over that I have achieved what almost no
other writer has achieved—my books have been translated into nearly every written
language in the world. Why worry about a mere magazine article, however important the
magazine itself might be? Because of the Favor Bank. So I really do need to write
something, but what have I got to say to people? Should I tell them that they need to
forget all the stories that have been told to them and take more risks?
They’ll all say, “I’m an independent being, thank you very much. I’ll do as I please.”
Should I tell them that they must allow the energy of love to flow more freely?
They’ll say, “I feel love already. In fact, I feel more and more love,” as if love could be
measured the way we measure the distance between two railway tracks, the height of
buildings, or the amount of yeast needed to make a loaf of bread.
I return to my desk. The envelope Mikhail left for me is open. I now know where Esther
is; I just need to know how to get there. I phone him and tell him about my walk across
the ice. He is impressed. I ask him what he’s doing tonight, and he says he’s going out
with his girlfriend, Lucrecia. I suggest taking them both to supper. No, not tonight, but, if
I like, I could go out with him and his friends next week.
I tell him that next week I’m giving a talk in the United States. There’s no hurry, he says,
we can wait two weeks.
“You must have heard a voice telling you to walk on the ice,” he says.
“No, I heard no voice.”
“So why did you do it?”
“Because I felt it needed to be done.”
“That’s just another way of hearing the voice.”
“I made a bet. If I could cross the ice, that meant I was ready. And I think I am.”
“Then the voice gave you the sign you needed.”
“Did the voice say anything to you about it?”
“No, it didn’t have to. When we were on the banks of the Seine and I said that the voice
would tell us when the time had come, I knew that it would also tell you.”
“As I said, I didn’t hear a voice.”
“That’s what you think. That’s what everyone thinks. And yet, judging by what the
presence tells me, everyone hears voices all the time. They are what help us to know
when we are face to face with a sign, you see.”
I decide not to argue. I just need some practical details: where to hire a car, how long the
journey takes, how to find the house, because otherwise all I have, apart from the map,
are a series of vague indications—follow the lakeshore, look for a company sign, turn
right, etc. Perhaps he knows someone who can help me.
We arrange our next meeting. Mikhail asks me to dress as discreetly as possible—the
“tribe” is going for a walkabout in Paris.
I ask him who this tribe is. “They’re the people who work with me at the restaurant,” he
replies, without going into detail. I ask him if he wants me to bring him anything from the
States, and he asks for a particular remedy for heartburn. There are, I think, more
interesting things I could bring, but I make a note of his request.

And the article?
I go back to the desk, think about what I’m going to write, look again at the open
envelope, and conclude that I was not surprised by what I found inside. After a few
meetings with Mikhail, it was pretty much what I had expected.
Esther is living in the steppes, in a small village in Central Asia; more precisely, in a
village in Kazakhstan.
I am no longer in a hurry. I continue reviewing my own story, which I tell to Marie in
obsessive detail; she has decided to do the same, and I am surprised by some of the things
she tells me, but the process seems to be working; she is more confident, less anxious.
I don’t know why I so want to find Esther, now that my love for her has illumined my
life, taught me new things, which is quite enough really. But I remember what Mikhail
said: “The story needs to reach its end,” and I decide to go on. I know that I will discover
the moment when the ice of our marriage cracked, and how we carried on walking
through the chill water as if nothing had happened. I know that I will discover this before
I reach that village, in order to close the circle or make it larger still.
The article! Has Esther become the Zahir again, thus preventing me from concentrating
on anything else?
No, when I need to do something urgent, something that requires creative energy, this is
my working method: I get into a state of near hysteria, decide to abandon the task
altogether, and then the article appears. I’ve tried doing things differently, preparing
everything carefully, but my imagination only works when it’s under enormous pressure.
I must respect the Favor Bank, I must write three pages about—guess what!—the
problems of male-female relationships. Me, of all people! But the editors believe that the
man who wrote A Time to Rend and a Time to Sew must know the human soul well.
I try to log on to the Internet, but it’s not working. It’s never been the same since I
destroyed the connection. I called various technicians, but when they finally turned up,
they could find nothing wrong with the computer. They asked me what I was
complaining about, spent half an hour doing tests, changed the configuration, and assured
me that the problem lay not with me but with the server. I allowed myself to be
convinced that everything was, in fact, fine, and I felt ridiculous for having asked for
help. Two or three hours later, the computer and the connection would both crash. Now,
after months of physical and psychological wear and tear, I simply accept that technology
is stronger and more powerful than me: it works when it wants to, and when it doesn’t,
it’s best to sit down and read the paper or go for a walk, and just wait until the cables and
the telephone links are in a better mood and the computer decides to work again. I am
not, I have discovered, my computer’s master: it has a life of its own.
I try a few more times, but I know from experience that it’s best just to give up. The
Internet, the biggest library in the world, has closed its doors to me for the moment. What
about reading a few magazines in search of inspiration? I pick up one that has just arrived
in the post and read a strange interview with a woman who has recently published a book
about—guess what?—love. The subject seems to be pursuing me everywhere.
The journalist asks if the only way a human being can find happiness is by finding his or
her beloved. The woman says no.

The idea that love leads to happiness is a modern invention, dating from the end of the
seventeenth century. Ever since then, people have been taught to believe that love should
last forever and that marriage is the best place in which to exercise that love. In the past,
there was less optimism about the longevity of passion. Romeo and Juliet isn’t a happy
story, it’s a tragedy. In the last few decades, expectations about marriage as the road to
personal fulfilment have grown considerably, as have disappointment and dissatisfaction.

It’s quite a brave thing to say, but no good for my article, mainly because I don’t agree
with her at all. I search my shelves for a book that has nothing to do with male-female
relationships: Magical Practices in North Mexico. Since obsession will not help me to
write my article, I need to refresh my mind, to relax.
I start leafing through it and suddenly I read something that surprises me:

The acomodador or giving-up point: there is always an event in our lives that is
responsible for us failing to progress: a trauma, a particularly bitter defeat, a
disappointment in love, even a victory that we did not quite understand, can make
cowards of us and prevent us from moving on. As part of the process of increasing his
hidden powers, the shaman must first free himself from that giving-up point and, to do so,
he must review his whole life and find out where it occurred.

The acomodador. This fit in with my experience of learning archery—the only sport I
enjoyed—for the teacher of archery says that no shot can ever be repeated, and there is no
point trying to learn from good or bad shots. What matters is repeating it hundreds and
thousands of times, until we have freed ourselves from the idea of hitting the target and
have ourselves become the arrow, the bow, the target. At that moment, the energy of the
“thing” (my teacher of kyudo—the form of Japanese archery I practiced—never used the
word “God”) guides our movements and then we begin to release the arrow not when we
want to, but when the “thing” believes that the moment has come.
The acomodador. Another part of my personal history resurfaces. If only Marie were
here! I need to talk about myself, about my childhood, to tell her how, when I was little, I
was always fighting and beating up the other children because I was the oldest in the
class. One day, my cousin gave me a thrashing, and I was convinced from then on that I
would never ever win another fight, and since then I have avoided any physical
confrontation, even though this has often meant me behaving like a coward and being
humiliated in front of girlfriends and friends alike.
The acomodador. For two years, I tried to learn how to play the guitar. To begin with, I
made rapid progress, but then reached a point where I could progress no further, because
I discovered that other people were learning faster than I was, which made me feel
mediocre; and so as not to have to feel ashamed, I decided that I was no longer interested
in learning. The same thing happened with snooker, football, bicycle racing. I learned
enough to do everything reasonably well, but there was always a point where I got stuck.
Why?
Because according to the story we are told, there always comes a moment in our lives
when we reach “our limit.” I often recalled my struggle to deny my destiny as a writer
and how Esther had always refused to allow the acomodador to lay down rules for my
dream. The paragraph I had just read fit in with the idea of forgetting one’s personal
history and being left only with the instinct that develops out of the various difficulties
and tragedies one has experienced. This is what the shamans of Mexico did and what the
nomads on the steppes of Central Asia preached.
The acomodador: there is always an event in our lives that is responsible for us failing to
progress.
It described exactly what happens in marriages in general and what had happened in my
relationship with Esther in particular.
I could now write my article for that magazine. I went over to the computer and within
half an hour I had written a first draft and was happy with the result. I wrote a story in the
form of a dialogue, as if it were fiction, but which was, in fact, a conversation I had had
in a hotel room in Amsterdam, after a day spent promoting my books and after the usual
publishers’ supper and the statutory tour of the sights, etc.
In my article, the names of the characters and the situation in which they find themselves
are omitted. In real life, Esther is in her nightdress and is looking out at the canal outside
our window. She has not yet become a war correspondent, her eyes are still bright with
joy, she loves her work, travels with me whenever she can, and life is still one big
adventure. I am lying on the bed in silence; my mind is far away, worrying about the next
day’s appointments.

Last week, I interviewed a man who’s an expert in police interrogations. He told me
that they get most of their information by using a technique they call ‘cold-hot.’ They
always start with a very aggressive policeman who says he has no intention of sticking to
the rules, who shouts and thumps the table. When he has scared the prisoner nearly
witless, the ‘good cop’ comes in and tells his colleague to stop, offers the prisoner a
cigarette, pretends to be his friend, and gets the information he wants.”
“Yes, I’ve heard about that.”
“Then he told me about something else that really frightened me. In 1971, a group of
researchers at Stanford University, in California, decided to create a simulated prison in
order to study the psychology of interrogations. They selected twenty-four student
volunteers and divided them into ‘guards’ and ‘criminals.’
“After just one week, they had to stop the experiment. The ‘guards’—girls and boys with
normal decent values, from nice families—had become real monsters. The use of torture
had become routine and the sexual abuse of ‘prisoners’ was seen as normal. The students
who took part in the project, both ‘guards’ and ‘criminals,’ suffered major trauma and
needed long-term medical help, and the experiment was never repeated.”
“Interesting.”
“What do you mean ‘interesting’? I’m talking about something of real importance: man’s
capacity to do evil whenever he’s given the chance. I’m talking about my work, about the
things I’ve learned!”
“That’s what I found interesting. Why are you getting so angry?”
“Angry? How could I possibly get angry with someone who isn’t paying the slightest bit
of attention to what I’m saying? How can I possibly be angry with someone who isn’t
even provoking me, who’s just lying there, staring into space?”
“How much did you have to drink tonight?”
“You don’t even know the answer to that, do you? I’ve been by your side all evening, and
you’ve no idea whether I’ve had anything to drink or not! You only spoke to me when
you wanted me to confirm something you had said or when you needed me to tell some
flattering story about you!”
“Look, I’ve been working all day and I’m exhausted. Why don’t you come to bed and
sleep? We can talk in the morning.”
“Because I’ve been doing this for weeks and months, for the last two years in fact! I try
to have a conversation, but you’re always tired, so we say, all right, we’ll go to sleep and
talk tomorrow. But tomorrow there are always other things to do, another day of work
and publishers’ suppers, so we say, all right, we’ll go to sleep and talk tomorrow. That’s
how I’m spending my life, waiting for the day when I can have you by my side again,
until I’ve had my fill; that’s all I ask, to create a world where I can always find refuge if I
need it: not so far away that I can’t be seen to be having an independent life, and not so
close that it looks as if I’m invading your universe.”
“What do you want me to do? Stop working? Give up everything we’ve struggled so hard
to achieve and go off on a cruise to the Caribbean? Don’t you understand that I enjoy
what I’m doing and haven’t the slightest intention of changing my life?”
“In your books, you talk about the importance of love, the need for adventure, the joy of
fighting for your dreams. And who do I have before me now? Someone who doesn’t read
what he writes. Someone who confuses love with convenience, adventure with taking
unnecessary risks, joy with obligation. Where is the man I married, who used to listen to
what I was saying?”
“Where is the woman I married?”
“You mean the one who always gave you support, encouragement, and affection? Her
body is here, looking out at the Singel Canal in Amsterdam, and she will, I believe, stay
with you for the rest of her life. But that woman’s soul is standing at the door ready to
leave.”
“But why?”
“Because of those three wretched words: We’ll talk tomorrow. Isn’t that enough? If not,
just consider that the woman you married was excited about life, full of ideas and joy and
desires, and is now rapidly turning into a housewife.”
“That’s ridiculous.”
“Of course it is! It’s nonsense! A trifle, especially considering that we have everything
we could possibly want. We’re very fortunate, we have money, we never discuss any
little flings we might have, we never have jealous rages. Besides, there are millions of
children in the world starving to death, there are wars, diseases, hurricanes, tragedies
happening every second. So what can I possibly have to complain about?”
“Do you think we should have a baby?”
“That’s how all the couples I know resolve their problems—by having a baby! You’re the
one who has always prized your freedom and put off having children for later on. Have
you really changed your mind?”
“I think the time is right.”
“Well, in my opinion, you couldn’t be more wrong! I don’t want your child. I want a
child by the man I knew, who had dreams, who was always by my side! If I ever do
become pregnant it will be by someone who understands me, keeps me company, listens
to me, who truly desires me!”
“You have been drinking. Look, I promise, we’ll talk tomorrow, but, please, come to bed
now, I’m tired.”
“All right, we’ll talk tomorrow. And if my soul, which is standing at the door, does
decide to leave, I doubt it will affect our lives very much.”
“Your soul won’t leave.”
“You used to know my soul very well, but you haven’t spoken to it for years, you don’t
know how much it has changed, how desperately it’s begging you to listen. Even to banal
topics of conversation, like experiments at American universities.”
“If your soul has changed so much, how come you’re the same?”
“Out of cowardice. Because I genuinely think that tomorrow we will talk. Because of
everything we’ve built together and which I don’t want to see destroyed. Or for that worst
of all possible reasons, because I’ve simply given up.”
“That’s just what you’ve been accusing me of doing.”
“You’re right. I looked at you, thinking it was you I was looking at, but the truth is I was
looking at myself. Tonight I’m going to pray with all my might and all my faith and ask
God not to let me spend the rest of my days like this.”

I hear the applause, the theater is packed. I’m about to do the one thing that always
gives me sleepless nights, I’m about to give a lecture.
The master of ceremonies begins by saying that there’s no need to introduce me, which is
a bit much really, since that’s what he’s there for and he isn’t taking into account the
possibility that there might be lots of people in the audience who have simply been
invited along by friends. Despite what he says, however, he ends up giving a few
biographical details and talking about my qualities as a writer, the prizes I’ve won, and
the millions of books I’ve sold. He thanks the sponsors, turns to me, and the floor is
mine.
I thank him too. I tell the audience that the most important things I have to say are in my
books, but that I feel I have an obligation to my public to reveal the man who lies behind
those words and paragraphs. I explain that our human condition makes us tend to share
only the best of ourselves, because we are always searching for love and approval. My
books, however, will only ever be the mountaintop visible in the clouds or an island in
the ocean: the light falls on it, everything seems to be in its place, but beneath the surface
lies the unknown, the darkness, the incessant search for self.
I describe how difficult it was to write A Time to Rend and a Time to Sew, and that there
are many parts of the book which I myself am only beginning to understand now, as I
reread it, as if the created thing were always greater and more generous than its creator.
I say that there is nothing more boring than reading interviews or going to lectures by
authors who insist on explaining the characters in their books: if a book isn’t selfexplanatory,
then the book isn’t worth reading. When a writer appears in public, he
should attempt to show the audience his universe, not try to explain his books; and in this
spirit, I begin talking about something more personal.
“Some time ago, I was in Geneva for a series of interviews. At the end of a day’s work,
and because a woman friend I was supposed to have supper with canceled at the last
minute, I set off for a stroll around the city. It was a particularly lovely night, the streets
were deserted, the bars and restaurants still full of life, and everything seemed utterly
calm, orderly, pretty, and yet suddenly…suddenly I realized that I was utterly alone.
“Needless to say, I had been alone on other occasions during the year. Needless to say,
my girlfriend was only two hours away by plane. Needless to say, after a busy day, what
could be better than a stroll through the narrow streets and lanes of the old city, without
having to talk to anyone, simply enjoying the beauty around me. And yet the feeling that
surfaced was one of oppressive, distressing loneliness—not having someone with whom I
could share the city, the walk, the things I’d like to say.
“I got out my cell phone; after all, I had a reasonable number of friends in the city, but it
was too late to phone anyone. I considered going into one of the bars and ordering a
drink; someone was bound to recognize me and invite me to join them. But I resisted the
temptation and tried to get through that moment, discovering, in the process, that there is
nothing worse than the feeling that no one cares whether we exist or not, that no one is
interested in what we have to say about life, and that the world can continue turning
without our awkward presence.
“I began to imagine how many millions of people were, at that moment, feeling utterly
useless and wretched—however rich, charming, and delightful they might be—because
they were alone that night, as they were yesterday, and as they might well be tomorrow.
Students with no one to go out with, older people sitting in front of the TV as if it were
their sole salvation, businessmen in their hotel rooms, wondering if what they were doing
made any sense, women who spent the afternoon carefully applying their makeup and
doing their hair in order to go to a bar only to pretend that they’re not looking for
company; all they want is confirmation that they’re still attractive; the men ogle them and
chat them up, but the women reject them all disdainfully, because they feel inferior and
are afraid the men will find out that they’re single mothers or lowly clerks with nothing to
say about what’s going on in the world because they work from dawn to dusk to scrape a
living and have no time to read the newspapers. People who look at themselves in the
mirror and think themselves ugly, believing that being beautiful is what really matters,
and spend their time reading magazines in which everyone is pretty, rich, and famous.
Husbands and wives who wish they could talk over supper as they used to, but there are
always other things demanding their attention, more important things, and the
conversation can always wait for a tomorrow that never comes.
“That day, I had lunch with a friend who had just got divorced and she said to me: ‘Now I
can enjoy the freedom I’ve always dreamed of having.’ But that’s a lie. No one wants that
kind of freedom: we all want commitment, we all want someone to be beside us to enjoy
the beauties of Geneva, to discuss books, interviews, films, or even to share a sandwich
with because there isn’t enough money to buy one each. Better to eat half a sandwich
than a whole one. Better to be interrupted by the man who wants to get straight back
home because there’s a big game on TV tonight or by the woman who stops outside a
shop window and interrupts what we were saying about the cathedral tower, far better
that than to have the whole of Geneva to yourself with all the time and quiet in the world
to visit it.
“Better to go hungry than to be alone. Because when you’re alone—and I’m talking here
about an enforced solitude not of our choosing—it’s as if you were no longer part of the
human race.
“A lovely hotel awaited me on the other side of the river, with its luxurious rooms, its
attentive employees, its five-star service. And that only made me feel worse, because I
should have felt contented, satisfied with all I had achieved.
“On the way back, I passed other people in the same situation and noticed that they fell
into two categories: those who looked arrogant, because they wanted to pretend they had
chosen to be alone on that lovely night, and those who looked sad and ashamed of their
solitary state.
“I’m telling you all this because the other day I remembered being in a hotel room in
Amsterdam with a woman who was talking to me about her life. I’m telling you all this
because, although in Ecclesiastes it says there is a time to rend and a time to sew,
sometimes the time to rend leaves deep scars. Being with someone else and making that
person feel as if they were of no importance in our life is far worse than feeling alone and
miserable in the streets of Geneva.”
There was a long moment of silence before the applause.

I arrived in a gloomy part of Paris, which was nevertheless said to have the most
vibrant cultural life of the whole city. It took me a while to recognize the scruffy group of
people before me as the same ones who appeared on Thursdays in the Armenian
restaurant immaculately dressed in white.
“Why are you all wearing fancy dress? Is this some kind of tribute to a movie?”
“It’s not fancy dress,” replied Mikhail. “Don’t you change your clothes to go to a gala
supper? Would you wear a jacket and tie to play golf?”
“All right, let me put the question another way: Why have you decided to dress like
young homeless people?”
“Because, at this moment, we are young homeless people, or, rather, four young
homeless people and two homeless adults.”
“Let me put the question a third way, then: Why are you dressed like that?”
“In the restaurant, we feed our body and talk about the Energy to people with something
to lose. Among the beggars, we feed our soul and talk to those who have nothing to lose.
Now, we come to the most important part of our work: meeting the members of the
invisible movement that is renewing the world, people who live each day as if it were
their last, while the old live each day as if it were their first.”
He was talking about something I had already noticed and which seemed to be growing
by the day: this was how young people dressed, in grubby, but highly imaginative outfits,
based on military uniforms or sci-fi movies. They all went in for body piercing too and
sported highly individual haircuts. Often, the groups were accompanied by threateninglooking
Alsatian dogs. I once asked a friend why these people always had a dog with
them and he told me—although I don’t know if it’s true—that the police couldn’t arrest
the owners because they had nowhere to put the dogs.
A bottle of vodka began doing the rounds; we had drunk vodka when we were with the
beggars and I wondered if this had to do with Mikhail’s origins. I took a sip, imagining
what people would say if they saw me there.
I decided they would say, “He’s probably doing research for his next book,” and felt
more relaxed.
“I’m ready now to go and find Esther, but I need some more information, because I know
nothing about your country.”
“I’ll go with you.”
“What?”
That wasn’t in my plans at all. My journey was a return to everything I had lost in myself,
and would end somewhere in the Central Asian steppes. It was something intimate and
personal, something that did not require witnesses.
“As long as you pay for my ticket, of course. I need to go back to Kazakhstan. I miss my
country.”
“I thought you had work to do here. Don’t you have to be at the restaurant on Thursdays
for the performances.”
“You keep calling it a performance. I’ve told you before, it’s a meeting, a way of
reviving what we have lost, the tradition of conversation. But don’t worry. Anastásia
here,” and he pointed to a girl wearing a nose stud, “is already developing her gift. She
can take care of everything while I’m away.”
“He’s jealous,” said Alma, the woman who played the instrument that looked like a
cymbal and who told stories at the end of each meeting.
“Understandable, really,” said another boy, who was dressed in a leather outfit adorned
with metal studs, safety pins, and buckles made to look like razor blades. “Mikhail is
younger, better-looking, and more in touch with the Energy.”
“He’s also less famous, less rich, and less in touch with those in power,” said Anastásia.
“From the female point of view, things are pretty evenly balanced, so I reckon they’re
both going with what they’ve got.”
Everyone laughed and the bottle went the rounds again. I was the only one who didn’t see
the joke. I was surprising myself, though; it had been many years since I had sat on a
pavement in Paris, and this pleased me.
“The tribe is bigger than you think. They’re everywhere, from the Eiffel Tower down as
far as the town of Tarbes where I was staying recently. But I can’t honestly say I
understand what it’s all about.”
“They can be found farther south than Tarbes, and they follow routes every bit as
interesting as the road to Santiago. They set off from somewhere in France or somewhere
else in Europe, swearing that they’re going to be part of a society that exists outside of
society. They’re afraid of going back home and getting a job and getting married—they’ll
fight against all that for as long as they can. There are rich and poor among them, but
they’re not that interested in money. They look completely different, and yet when people
walk past them, they usually pretend not to see them because they’re afraid.”
“Do they have to look so aggressive?”
“Yes, because the passion to destroy is a creative passion. If they weren’t aggressive, the
boutiques would immediately fill up with clothes like these; publishers would soon be
producing magazines about the new movement ‘sweeping the world with its
revolutionary attitudes’; TV programs would have a strand devoted to the tribe;
sociologists would write learned articles; psychiatrists would counsel the families of tribe
members, and it would lose all its impact. So the less they know about us, the better: our
attack is really a defense.”
“Actually, I only came tonight so that I could ask you for some information, but, who
knows, perhaps spending the night with you will turn out to be just the kind of rich and
novel experience to move me on from a personal history that no longer allows for new
experiences. As for the journey to Kazakhstan, I’ve no intention of taking anyone with
me. If I can’t get help from you, the Favor Bank will provide me with all the necessary
contacts. I’m going away in two days’ time and I’m a guest at an important supper
tomorrow night, but after that, I’m free for two weeks.”
Mikhail appeared to hesitate.
“It’s up to you. You’ve got the map, the name of the village, and it shouldn’t be hard to
find the house where she’s staying. I’m sure the Favor Bank can help get you as far as
Almaty, but I doubt it will get you much farther than that, because the rules of the steppes
are different. Besides, I reckon I’ve made a few deposits in your account at the Favor
Bank too. It’s time to reclaim them. I miss my mother.”
He was right.
“We’ve got to start work,” said Alma’s husband.
“Why do you want to go with me, Mikhail? Is it really just because you miss your
mother?”
He didn’t reply. The man started playing the drum and Alma was clanging the cymbal,
while the others begged for money from passersby. Why did he want to go with me? And
how would I be able to draw on the Favor Bank in the steppes, if I knew absolutely no
one? I could get a visa from the Kazakhstan embassy, hire a car and a guide from the
French consulate in Almaty—what else did I need?
I stood there observing the group, not knowing quite what to do. It wasn’t the right
moment to discuss the trip, and I had work to do and a girlfriend waiting for me at home.
Why didn’t I just leave now?
I didn’t leave because I was feeling free, doing things I hadn’t done for years, opening up
a space in my soul for new experiences, driving the acomodador out of my life,
experiencing things that might not interest me very much, but which were at least
different.
The vodka ran out and was replaced by rum. I hate rum, but since that was all there was,
it was best to adapt to the circumstances. The two musicians continued to play and
whenever anyone was brave enough to come near, one of the girls would hold out her
hand and ask if they had any spare change. The person approached would normally
quicken their pace, but would always receive a “Thanks, have a nice evening.” One
person, seeing that he had been offered thanks rather than abuse, turned back and gave us
some money.
After watching this scene for more than ten minutes, without anyone in the group
addressing a single word to me, I went into a bar, bought two bottles of vodka, came
back, and poured the rum into the gutter. Anastásia seemed pleased by my gesture and so
I tried to start a conversation.
“Can you explain why you all use body piercing?”
“Why do other people wear jewels or high heels or low-cut dresses even in winter?”
“That’s not an answer.”
“We use body piercing because we’re the new barbarians sacking Rome. We don’t wear
uniforms and so we need something to identify us as one of the invading tribes.”
She made it sound as if they were part of a important historical movement, but for the
people going home, they were just a group of unemployed young people with nowhere to
sleep, cluttering up the streets of Paris, bothering the tourists who were so good for the
local economy, and driving to despair the mothers and fathers who had brought them into
the world and now had no control over them.
I had been like that once, when the hippie movement was at its height—the huge rock
concerts, the big hair, the garish clothes, the Viking symbol, the peace sign. As Mikhail
said, the whole hippie thing had turned into just another consumer product and had
vanished, destroying its icons.
A man came down the street. The boy in leather and safety pins went over to him with his
hand outstretched. He asked for money. However, instead of hurrying on or muttering
something like “I haven’t any change,” the man stopped and looked at us and said very
loudly:
“I wake up every morning with a debt of approximately 100,000 euros, because of my
house, because of the economic situation in Europe, because of my wife’s expensive
tastes. In other words, I’m worse off than you are and with far more on my mind! How
about you giving me a bit of change to help me decrease my debt just a little?”
Lucrecia—whom Mikhail claimed was his girlfriend—produced a fifty-euro note and
gave it to the man.
“Buy yourself some caviar. You need a bit of joy in your miserable life.”
The man thanked her and walked off, as if it were the most natural thing in the world to
be given fifty euros by a beggar. The Italian girl had had a fifty-euro note in her bag and
here we were begging in the street!
“Let’s go somewhere else,” said the boy in leather.
“Where?” asked Mikhail.
“We could see if we can find the others. North or south?”
Anastásia chose west. After all, she was, according to Mikhail, developing her gift.

We passed by the Tour Saint-Jacques where, centuries before, pilgrims heading for
Santiago de Compostela used to gather. We passed Notre-Dame, where there were a few
more “new barbarians.” The vodka had run out and so I went to buy two more bottles,
even though I wasn’t sure that everyone in the group was over eighteen. No one thanked
me; they seemed to think it was perfectly normal.
I started to feel a little drunk and began eyeing one of the girls who had just joined us.
Everyone talked very loudly, kicked a few litter bins—strange metal objects with a
plastic bag dangling from them—and said absolutely nothing of any interest.
We crossed the Seine and were suddenly brought to a halt by one of those orange-andwhite
tapes that are used to mark off an area under construction. It prevented people from
walking along the pavement, forcing them to step off the curb into the road and then
rejoin the pavement five meters further on.
“It’s still here,” said one of the new arrivals.
“What’s still here?” I asked.
“Who’s he?”
“A friend of ours,” replied Lucrecia. “In fact, you’ve probably read one of his books.”
The newcomer recognized me, but showed neither surprise nor reverence; on the
contrary, he asked if I could give him some money, a request I instantly refused.
“If you want to know why the tape is there, you’ll have to give me a euro. Everything in
life has its price, as you know better than anyone. And information is one of the most
expensive products in the world.”
No one in the group came to my aid, so I had to pay him a euro for his answer.
“The tape is here because we put it there. As you can see, there are no repairs going on at
all, just a stupid orange-and-white tape blocking the stupid pavement. But no one asks
what it’s doing there; they step off the pavement, walk along the road at the risk of being
knocked down, and get back on farther up. By the way, I read somewhere that you’d had
an accident. Is that true?”
“Yes, I did, and all because I stepped off the pavement.”
“Don’t worry, when people step off the pavement here, they’re always extra careful. It
was one of the reasons we put the tape up, to make people more aware of what was going
on around them.”
“No, it wasn’t,” said the girl I was attracted to. “It’s just a joke, so that we can laugh at
the people who obey without even thinking about what they’re obeying. There’s no
reason, it’s not important, and no one will get knocked down.”
More people joined the group. Now there were eleven of us and two Alsatian dogs. We
were no longer begging, because no one dared go near this band of savages who seemed
to enjoy the fear they aroused. The drink had run out again and they all looked at me and
asked me to buy another bottle, as if I had a duty to keep them drunk. I realized that this
was my passport to the pilgrimage, so I set off in search of a shop.
The girl I was interested in—and who was young enough to be my daughter—seemed to
notice me looking at her and started talking to me. I knew it was simply a way of
provoking me, but I joined in. She didn’t tell me anything about her personal life, she just
asked me how many cats and how many lampposts there were on the back of a ten-dollar
bill.
“Cats and lampposts?”
“You don’t know, do you? You don’t give any real value to money at all. Well, for your
information, there are four cats and eleven lampposts.”
Four cats and eleven lampposts. I promised myself that I would check this out the next
time I saw a ten-dollar bill.
“Do any of you take drugs?”
“Some, but mainly it’s just alcohol. Not much at all, in fact, it’s not our style. Drugs are
more for people of your generation, aren’t they? My mother, for example, drugs herself
on cooking for the family, compulsively tidying the house, and suffering over me. When
something goes wrong with my dad’s business, she suffers. Can you believe that? She
suffers over me, my father, my brothers and sisters, everything. I was wasting so much
energy pretending to be happy all the time, I thought it was best just to leave home.”
Another personal history.
“Like your wife,” said a young man with fair hair and an eyebrow ring. “She left home
too, didn’t she? Was that because she had to pretend to be happy all the time?”
So she had been here too. Had she given some of these young people a piece of that
bloodstained shirt?
“She suffered too,” laughed Lucrecia. “But as far as we know, she’s not suffering
anymore. That’s what I call courage!”
“What was my wife doing here?”
“She came with the Mongolian guy, the one with all the strange ideas about love that
we’re only just beginning to understand. And she used to ask questions and tell us her
story. One day, she stopped doing both. She said she was tired of complaining. We
suggested that she give up everything and come with us, because we were planning a trip
to North Africa. She thanked us, but said she had other plans and would be heading off in
the opposite direction.”
“Didn’t you read his latest book?” asked Anastásia.
“No, I didn’t fancy it. People told me it was too romantic. Now when are we going to get
some more booze?”

People made way for us as if we were samurai riding into a village, bandits arriving in a
frontier town, barbarians entering Rome. The tribe didn’t make any aggressive gestures,
the aggression was all in the clothes, the body piercing, the loud conversations, the sheer
oddness. We finally found a minimart: to my great discomfort and alarm, they all went in
and started rummaging around on the shelves.
I didn’t know any of them, apart from Mikhail, and even then I didn’t know if what he
had told me about himself was true. What if they stole something? What if one of them
was armed? As the oldest member of the group, was I responsible for their actions?
The man at the cash register kept glancing up at the security mirror suspended from the
ceiling in the tiny shop. The group, knowing that he was worried, spread out, gesturing to
each other, and the tension grew. To cut things short, I picked up three bottles of vodka
and walked quickly over to the cash register.
A woman buying cigarettes said that, in her day, Paris had been full of bohemians and
artists, not threatening bands of homeless people. She suggested that the cashier call the
police.
“I’ve got a feeling something bad is going to happen any minute now,” she muttered.
The cashier was terrified by this invasion of his little world, the fruit of years of work and
many loans, where perhaps his son worked in the morning, his wife in the afternoon, and
he at night. He nodded to the woman, and I realized that he had already called the police.
I hate getting involved in things that are none of my business, but I also hate being a
coward. Every time it happens, I lose all self-respect for a week.
“Don’t worry…” I began.
It was too late.
Two policemen came in and the owner beckoned them over, but the young people
disguised as extraterrestrials paid no attention—it was all part of standing up to
representatives of the established order. It must have happened to them many times
before. They knew they hadn’t committed any crime (apart from crimes against fashion,
but that could all change with next season’s haute couture). They must have been afraid,
but they didn’t show it and continued talking loudly.
“I saw a comedian the other day. He said that stupid people should have the word ‘stupid’
written on their identity card,” said Anastásia to no one in particular. “That way, we’d
know who we were talking to.”
“Yeah, stupid people are a real danger to society,” said the girl with the angelic face and
vampire clothing, who, shortly before, had been talking to me about the number of
lampposts and cats to be found on the back of a ten-dollar bill. “They should be tested
once a year and have a license for walking the streets, like drivers do to drive.”
The policemen, who couldn’t have been very much older than the tribe, said nothing.
“Do you know what I’d like to do,” it was Mikhail’s voice, but I couldn’t see him
because he was concealed behind a shelf. “I’d like to change the labels on everything in
this shop. People would be completely lost. They wouldn’t know whether things should
be eaten hot or cold, boiled or fried. If they don’t read the instructions, they don’t know
how to prepare a meal. They’ve lost all their culinary instincts.”
Everyone who had spoken up until then had done so in perfect Parisian French. Only
Mikhail had a foreign accent.
“May I see your passport,” said one of the policemen.
“He’s with me.”
The words emerged naturally, even though I knew what it could mean—another scandal.
The policeman looked at me.
“I wasn’t talking to you, but since you’re obviously with this lot, I hope you’ve got some
kind of document to prove who you are, and a good reason for being surrounded by
people half your age and buying vodka.”
I could refuse to show my papers. I wasn’t legally obliged to have them with me. But I
was thinking about Mikhail. One of the policemen was standing next to him now. Did he
really have permission to stay in France? What did I know about him apart from the
stories he had told me about his visions and his epilepsy? What if the tension of the
moment provoked an attack?
I stuck my hand in my pocket and took out my driver’s license.
“So you’re…”
“I am.”
“I thought it was you. I’ve read one of your books. But that doesn’t put you above the
law.”
The fact that he had read one of my books threw me completely. Here was this shavenheaded
young man in a uniform, albeit a very different one from that worn by the tribes
in order to tell each other apart. Perhaps he too had once dreamed of having the freedom
to be different, of subtly challenging authority, although never disrespectfully enough to
end up in jail. He probably had a father who had never offered him any alternative, a
family who needed his financial support, or perhaps he was just afraid of going beyond
his own familiar world.
I said gently:
“No, I’m not above the law. In fact, no one here has broken the law. Unless the
gentleman at the cash register or the lady buying cigarettes would like to make some
specific complaint.”
When I turned around, the woman who had mentioned the artists and bohemians of her
day, that prophet of imminent doom, the embodiment of truth and good manners, had
disappeared. She would doubtless tell her neighbors the next day that, thanks to her, an
attempted robbery had been averted.
“I’ve no complaints,” said the man behind the register. “I got worried because they were
talking so loudly, but it looks like they weren’t actually doing any harm.”
“Is the vodka for you, sir?”
I nodded. They knew that everyone there was drunk, but they didn’t want to make a big
deal out of a harmless situation.
“A world without stupid people would be complete chaos!” said the boy wearing leather
and metal studs. “Instead of all the unemployed people we have today, there would be too
many jobs and no one to do the work!”
“Shut up!”
My voice sounded authoritative, decisive.
“Just stop talking, all of you!”
To my surprise, silence fell. My heart was beating furiously, but I continued talking to the
policemen as if I were the calmest person in the world.
“If they were really dangerous, they wouldn’t be talking like that.”
The policeman turned to the cashier:
“If you need us, we’ll be around.”
And before going out, he said to his colleague, so that his voice echoed around the whole
shop, “I love stupid people. If it wasn’t for them, we might be having to tackle some real
criminals.”
“You’re right,” said the other policeman. “Stupid people are a nice safe distraction.”
They gave their usual salute and left.
The only thing that occurred to me to do when we left the shop was to smash the bottles
of vodka. I saved one of them, though, and it was passed rapidly from mouth to mouth.
By the way they were drinking, I could see they were frightened, as frightened as I was.
The only difference was that they had gone on the offensive when threatened.
“I don’t feel good,” said Mikhail to one of them. “Let’s go.”
I didn’t know what he meant by “Let’s go”: each to his own home or town or bridge? No
one asked me if I wanted to go with them, so I simply followed after. Mikhail’s remark “I
don’t feel good” unsettled me; that meant we wouldn’t have another chance that night to
talk about the trip to Central Asia. Should I just leave? Or should I stick it out and see
what “Let’s go” meant? I discovered that I was enjoying myself and that I’d like to try
seducing the girl in the vampire outfit.
Onward, then.
I could always leave at the first sign of danger.
As we headed off—where, I didn’t know—I was thinking about this whole experience. A
tribe. A symbolic return to a time when men traveled in protective groups and required
very little to survive. A tribe in the midst of another hostile tribe called society, crossing
society’s lands and using aggression as a defense against rejection. A group of people
who had joined together to form an ideal society, about which I knew nothing beyond the
body piercing and the clothes that they wore. What were their values? What did they
think about life? How did they earn their money? Did they have dreams or was it enough
just to wander the world? All this was much more interesting than the supper I had to go
to the following evening, where I knew exactly what would happen. I was convinced that
it must be the effect of the vodka, but I was feeling free, my personal history was
growing ever more remote, there was only the present moment, instinct; the Zahir had
disappeared….
The Zahir?
Yes, it had disappeared, but now I realized that the Zahir was more than a man obsessed
with an object, with a vein in the marble of one of the twelve hundred columns in the
mosque in Córdoba, as Borges puts it, or, as in my own painful case for the last two
years, with a woman in Central Asia. The Zahir was a fixation on everything that had
been passed from generation to generation; it left no question unanswered; it took up all
the space; it never allowed us even to consider the possibility that things could change.
The all-powerful Zahir seemed to be born with every human being and to gain full
strength in childhood, imposing rules that would thereafter always be respected:
People who are different are dangerous; they belong to another tribe; they want our lands
and our women.
We must marry, have children, reproduce the species.
Love is only a small thing, enough for one person, and any suggestion that the heart
might be larger than this is considered perverse.
When we marry, we are authorized to take possession of the other person, body and soul.
We must do jobs we detest because we are part of an organized society, and if everyone
did what they wanted to do, the world would come to a standstill.
We must buy jewelry; it identifies us with our tribe, just as body piercing identifies those
of a different tribe.
We must be amusing at all times and sneer at those who express their real feelings; it’s
dangerous for a tribe to allow its members to show their feelings.
We must at all costs avoid saying no because people prefer those who always say yes,
and this allows us to survive in hostile territory.
What other people think is more important than what we feel.
Never make a fuss—it might attract the attention of an enemy tribe.
If you behave differently, you will be expelled from the tribe because you could infect
others and destroy something that was extremely difficult to organize in the first place.
We must always consider the look of our new cave, and if we don’t have a clear idea of
our own, then we must call in a decorator who will do his best to show others what good
taste we have.
We must eat three meals a day, even if we’re not hungry, and when we fail to fit the
current ideal of beauty we must fast, even if we’re starving.
We must dress according to the dictates of fashion, make love whether we feel like it or
not, kill in the name of our country, wish time away so that retirement comes more
quickly, elect politicians, complain about the cost of living, change our hairstyle, criticize
anyone who is different, go to a religious service on Sunday, Saturday, or Friday,
depending on our religion, and there beg forgiveness for our sins and puff ourselves up
with pride because we know the truth and despise the other tribe, who worships a false
god.
Our children must follow in our footsteps; after all, we are older and know about the
world.
We must have a university degree even if we never get a job in the area of knowledge we
were forced to study.
We must study things that we will never use, but which someone told us were important
to know: algebra, trigonometry, the code of Hammurabi.
We must never make our parents sad, even if this means giving up everything that makes
us happy.
We must play music quietly, talk quietly, weep in private, because I am the all-powerful
Zahir, who lays down the rules and determines the distance between railway tracks, the
meaning of success, the best way to love, the importance of rewards.

We stop outside a relatively chic building in an expensive area. One of the group taps in
the code at the front door and we all go up to the third floor. I thought we would find one
of those understanding families who put up with their son’s friends in order to keep him
close to home and keep an eye on him. But when Lucrecia opened the door, everything
was in darkness. As my eyes grew accustomed to the light from the street filtering in
through the windows, I saw a large empty living room. The only decoration was a
fireplace that probably hadn’t been used for years.
A fair-haired boy, who was nearly six feet tall and wore a long rain cape and a mohawk,
went into the kitchen and returned with some lighted candles. We all sat around in a
circle on the floor and, for the first time that night, I felt afraid: it was like being in a
horror movie in which a satanic ritual is about to begin, and where the victim will be the
stranger who was unwise enough to tag along.
Mikhail was looking pale and his eyes kept darting about, unable to fix on any one place,
and that only increased my feeling of unease. He was on the point of having an epileptic
fit. Would the people there know what to do in that situation? Wouldn’t it be better just to
leave now and not get involved in a potential tragedy?
That would perhaps be the most prudent thing to do, in keeping with a life in which I was
a famous author who writes about spirituality and should therefore be setting an example.
Yes, if I was being sensible, I would say to Lucrecia that, in case of an attack, she should
place something in her boyfriend’s mouth to stop his tongue rolling back and prevent him
choking to death. She must know this already, but in the world of the followers of the
social Zahir, we leave nothing to chance, we need to be at peace with our conscience.
That is how I would have acted before my accident, but now my personal history had
become unimportant. It had stopped being history and was once more becoming a legend,
a search, an adventure, a journey into and away from myself. I was once more in a time
in which the things around me were changing and that is how I wanted it to be for the rest
of my days. (I remembered one of my ideas for an epitaph: “He died while he was still
alive.”) I was carrying with me the experiences of my past, which allowed me to react
with speed and precision, but I wasn’t bothered about the lessons I had learned. Imagine a
warrior in the middle of a fight, pausing to decide which move to make next? He would
be dead in an instant.
And the warrior in me, using intuition and technique, decided that I needed to stay, to
continue the night’s experiences, even if it was late and I was tired and drunk and afraid
that a worried or angry Marie might be waiting up for me. I sat down next to Mikhail so
that I could act quickly if he had a fit.
I noticed that he seemed to be in control of his epileptic attack. He gradually grew
calmer, and his eyes took on the same intensity as when he was the young man in white
standing on the stage at the Armenian restaurant.
“We will start with the usual prayer,” he said.
And the young people, who, up until then, had been aggressive, drunken misfits, closed
their eyes and held hands in a large circle. Even the two Alsatian dogs sitting in one
corner of the room seemed calmer.
“Dear Lady, when I look at the cars, the shop windows, the people oblivious to everyone
else, when I look at all the buildings and the monuments, I see in them your absence.
Make us capable of bringing you back.”
The group continued as one: “Dear Lady, we recognize your presence in the difficulties
we are experiencing. Help us not to give up. Help us to think of you with tranquility and
determination, even when it is hard to accept that we love you.”
I noticed that everyone there was wearing the same symbol
somewhere on their clothing. Sometimes it was in the form of a brooch, or a metal badge,
or a piece of embroidery, or was even drawn on the fabric with a pen.
“I would like to dedicate tonight to the man sitting on my right. He sat down beside me
because he wanted to protect me.”
How did he know that?
“He’s a good man. He knows that love transforms and he allows himself to be
transformed by love. He still carries much of his personal history in his soul, but he is
continually trying to free himself from it, which is why he stayed with us tonight. He is
the husband of the woman we all know, the woman who left me a relic as proof of her
friendship and as a talisman.”
Mikhail took out the piece of bloodstained cloth and put it down in front of him.
“This is part of the unknown soldier’s shirt. Before he died, he said to the woman: ‘Cut
up my clothes and distribute the pieces among those who believe in death and who, for
that reason, are capable of living as if today were their last day on earth. Tell those people
that I have just seen the face of God; tell them not to be afraid, but not to grow
complacent either. Seek the one truth, which is love. Live in accordance with its laws.’”
They all gazed reverently at the piece of cloth.
“We were born into a time of revolt. We pour all our enthusiasm into it, we risk our lives
and our youth, and suddenly, we feel afraid, and that initial joy gives way to the real
challenges: weariness, monotony, doubts about our own abilities. We notice that some of
our friends have already given up. We are obliged to confront loneliness, to cope with
sharp bends in the road, to suffer a few falls with no one near to help us, and we end up
asking ourselves if it’s worth all that effort.”
Mikhail paused.
“It is. And we will carry on, knowing that our soul, even though it is eternal, is at this
moment caught in the web of time, with all its opportunities and limitations. We will, as
far as possible, free ourselves from this web. When this proves impossible and we return
to the story we were told, we will nevertheless remember our battles and be ready to
resume the struggle as soon as the conditions are right. Amen.”
“Amen,” echoed the others.
“I need to talk to the Lady,” said the fair young man with the Mohawk.
“Not tonight. I’m tired.”
There was a general murmur of disappointment. Unlike those people at the Armenian
restaurant, they knew Mikhail’s story and knew about the presence he felt by his side. He
got up and went into the kitchen to get a glass of water. I went with him.
I asked how they had come by that apartment, and he explained that in French law
anyone can legally move into a building that is not being used by its owner. It was, in
short, a squat.
I began to be troubled by the thought that Marie would be waiting up for me. Mikhail
took my arm.
“You said today that you were going to the steppes. I’ll say this one more time: Please,
take me with you. I need to go back to my country, even if only for a short time, but I
haven’t any money. I miss my people, my mother, my friends. I could say, ‘The voice
tells me that you will need me,’ but that wouldn’t be true: you could find Esther easily
enough and without any help at all. But I need an infusion of energy from my homeland.”
“I can give you the money for a return ticket.”
“I know you can, but I’d like to be there with you, to go with you to the village where
she’s living, to feel the wind on my face, to help you along the road that will lead you
back to the woman you love. She was—and still is—very important to me. I learned so
much from the changes she went through, from her determination, and I want to go on
learning. Do you remember me talking once about ‘interrupted stories’? I would like to
be by your side right up until the moment we reach her house. That way, I will have lived
through to the end this period of your—and my—life. When we reach her house, I will
leave you alone.”
I didn’t know what to say. I tried to talk about something else and asked about the people
in the living room.
“They’re people who are afraid of ending up like your generation, a generation that
dreamed it could revolutionize the world, but ended up giving in to ‘reality.’ We pretend
to be strong because we’re weak. There are still only a few of us, very few, but I think
that’s only a passing phase; people can’t go on deceiving themselves forever. Now what’s
your answer to my question?”
“Mikhail, you know how much I want to free myself from my personal history. If you
had asked me a while ago, I would have found it much more comfortable, more
convenient even, to travel with you, since you know the country, the customs, and the
possible dangers. Now, though, I feel that I should roll up Ariadne’s thread into a ball and
escape from the labyrinth I got myself into, and that I should do this alone. My life has
changed; I feel as if I were ten or even twenty years younger, and that in itself is enough
for me to want to set off in search of adventure.”
“When will you leave?”
“As soon as I get my visa. In two or three days’ time.”
“May the Lady go with you. The voice is saying that it is the right moment. If you change
your mind, let me know.”
I walked past the group of people lying on the floor, ready to go to sleep. On the way
home, it occurred to me that life was a much more joyful thing than I had thought it
would be at my age: it’s always possible to go back to being young and crazy again. I
was so focused on the present moment that I was surprised when I saw that people didn’t
recoil from me as I passed, didn’t fearfully lower their eyes. No one even noticed me, but
I liked the idea. This city was once again the city about which Henry IV had said, when
he was accused of betraying his Protestant religion by marrying a Catholic, “Paris is well
worth a mass.”
It was worth much more than that. I could see again the religious massacres, the
bloodlettings, the kings, the queens, the museums, the castles, the tortured artists, the
drunken writers, the philosophers who took their own lives, the soldiers who plotted to
conquer the world, the traitors who, with a gesture, brought down a whole dynasty, the
stories that had once been forgotten and were now remembered and retold.

For the first time in ages, I arrived home and did not immediately go over to the computer
to find out if anyone had e-mailed me, if there was some pressing matter requiring urgent
action: nothing was that urgent. I didn’t go into the bedroom to see if Marie was asleep
either, because I knew she would only be pretending to sleep.
I didn’t turn on the TV to watch the late-night news, because the news was exactly the
same news I used to listen to as a child: one country was threatening another country;
someone had betrayed someone else; the economy was going badly; some grand passion
had come to an end; Israel and Palestine had failed, after fifty long years, to reach an
agreement; another bomb had exploded; a hurricane had left thousands of people
homeless.
I remembered that the major networks that morning, having no terrorist attacks to report,
had all chosen as their main item a rebellion in Haiti. What did I care about Haiti? What
difference would that make to my life or to that of my wife, to the price of bread in Paris,
to Mikhail’s tribe? How could I have spent five minutes of my precious life listening to
someone talking about the rebels and the president, watching the usual scenes of street
protests being repeated over and over, and being reported as if it were a great event in the
history of humanity—a rebellion in Haiti! And I had swallowed it whole! I had watched
until the end! Stupid people really should be issued their own special identity cards
because they are the ones who feed the collective stupidity.
I opened the window and let in the icy night air. I took off my clothes and told myself
that I could withstand the cold. I stood there, not thinking anything, just aware of my feet
on the floor, my eyes fixed on the Eiffel Tower, my ears hearing barking dogs, police
sirens, and conversations I couldn’t quite understand.
I was not I, I was nothing—and that seemed to me quite marvelous.

You seem strange.”
“What do you mean ‘strange’?”
“You seem sad.”
“I’m not sad. I’m happy.”
“You see? Even your tone of voice is false: you’re sad about me, but you don’t dare say
anything.”
“Why should I be sad?”
“Because I came home late last night and I was drunk. You haven’t even asked me where
I went.”
“I’m not interested.”
“Why aren’t you interested? I told you I was going out with Mikhail, didn’t I?”
“Didn’t you go out with him, then?”
“Yes, I did.”
“So what’s there to ask?”
“Don’t you think that when your boyfriend, whom you claim you love, comes home late,
you should at least try to find out what happened?”
“All right, then, what happened?”
“Nothing. I went out with Mikhail and some of his friends.”
“Fine.”
“Do you believe me?”
“Of course I do.”
“I don’t think you love me anymore. You’re not jealous. You don’t care. Do I normally
get back home at two in the morning?”
“Didn’t you say you were a free man?”
“And I am.”
“In that case, it’s normal that you should get back home at two in the morning and do
whatever you want to do. If I were your mother, I’d be worried, but you’re a grown-up,
aren’t you? You men should stop behaving as if you wanted the women in your life to
treat you like children.”
“I don’t mean that kind of worried. I’m talking about jealousy.”
“Would you prefer it if I made a scene right now, over breakfast?”
“No, don’t do that, the neighbors will hear.”
“I don’t care about the neighbors. I won’t make a scene because I don’t feel like it. It’s
been hard for me, but I’ve finally accepted what you told me in Zagreb, and I’m trying to
get used to the idea. Meanwhile, if it makes you happy, I can always pretend to be
jealous, angry, crazy, or whatever.”
“As I said, you seem strange. I’m beginning to think I’m not important in your life
anymore.”
“And I’m beginning to think you’ve forgotten there’s a journalist waiting for you in the
sitting room, who is quite possibly listening to our conversation.”

Ah, the journalist. I go on automatic pilot, because I know what questions he will ask.
I know how the interview will begin (“Let’s talk about your new novel. What’s the main
message?”), and I know how I will respond (“If I wanted to put across a message, I’d
write a single sentence, not a book.”).
I know he’ll ask me what I feel about the critics, who are usually very hard on my work. I
know that he will end by asking: “And have you already started writing a new book?
What projects are you working on now?” To which I will respond: “That’s a secret.”
The interview begins as expected:
“Let’s talk about your new book. What’s the main message?”
“If I wanted to put across a message, I’d write a single sentence, not a book.”
“And why do you write?”
“Because that’s my way of sharing my feelings with others.”
This phrase is also part of my automatic pilot script, but I stop and correct myself:
“Although that particular story could be told in a different way.”
“In a different way? Do you mean you’re not happy with A Time to Rend and a Time to
Sew?”
“No, on the contrary, I’m very pleased with the book, but I’m not so pleased with the
answer I’ve just given you. Why do I write? The real answer is this: I write because I
want to be loved.”
The journalist eyed me suspiciously: What kind of confession was this?
“I write because when I was an adolescent, I was useless at football, I didn’t have a car or
much of an allowance, and I was pretty much of a weed.”
I was making a huge effort to keep talking. The conversation with Marie had reminded
me of a past that no longer made any sense; I needed to talk about my real personal
history, in order to become free of it. I went on:
“I didn’t wear trendy clothes either. That’s all the girls in my class were interested in, and
so they just ignored me. At night, when my friends were out with their girlfriends, I spent
my free time creating a world in which I could be happy: my companions were writers
and their books. One day, I wrote a poem for one of the girls in the street where I lived. A
friend found the poem in my room and stole it, and when we were all together, he showed
it to the entire class. Everyone laughed. They thought it was ridiculous—I was in love!
“The only one who didn’t laugh was the girl I wrote the poem for. The following
evening, when we went to the theater, she managed to fix things so that she sat next to
me, and she held my hand. We left the theater hand in hand. There was ugly, puny,
untrendy me strolling along with the girl all the boys in the class fancied.”
I paused. It was as if I were going back into the past, to the moment when her hand
touched mine and changed my life.
“And all because of a poem,” I went on. “A poem showed me that by writing and
revealing my invisible world, I could compete on equal terms with the visible world of
my classmates: physical strength, fashionable clothes, cars, being good at sports.”
The journalist was slightly surprised, and I was even more surprised. He managed to
compose himself, though, and asked:
“Why do you think the critics are so hard on your work?”
My automatic pilot would normally reply: “You just have to read the biography of any
writer from the past who is now considered a classic—not that I’m comparing myself
with them, you understand—to see how implacable their critics were then. The reason is
simple: Critics are extremely insecure, they don’t really know what’s going on, they’re
democrats when it comes to politics, but fascists when it comes to culture. They believe
that people are perfectly capable of choosing who governs them, but have no idea when it
comes to choosing films, books, music.”
I had abandoned my automatic pilot again, knowing full well that the journalist was
unlikely to publish my response.
“Have you ever heard of the law of Jante?”
“No, I haven’t,” he said.
“Well, it’s been in existence since the beginning of civilization, but it was only officially
set down in 1933 by a Danish writer. In the small town of Jante, the powers that be came
up with ten commandments telling people how they should behave, and it seems to exist
not only in Jante, but everywhere else too. If I had to sum it up in one sentence, I’d say:
‘Mediocrity and anonymity are the safest choice. If you opt for them, you’ll never face
any major problems in life. But if you try to be different…’”
“I’d like to know what these Jante commandments are,” said the journalist, who seemed
genuinely interested.
“I don’t have them here, but I can summarize if you like.”
I went over to my computer and printed out a condensed and edited version.
“You are nobody, never even dare to think that you know more than we do. You are of no
importance, you can do nothing right, your work is of no significance, but as long as you
never challenge us, you will live a happy life. Always take what we say seriously and
never laugh at our opinions.”
The journalist folded up the piece of paper and put it in his pocket.
“You’re right. If you’re a nobody, if your work has no impact, then it deserves to be
praised. If, however, you climb out of that state of mediocrity and are a success, then
you’re defying the law and deserve to be punished.”
I was so pleased that he had reached this conclusion on his own.
“And it isn’t only the critics who say that,” I added. “More people, far more people than
you might think, say exactly the same thing.”

Later that afternoon, I rang Mikhail’s cell phone number:
“Let’s travel to Kazakhstan together.”
He didn’t seem in the least surprised; he merely thanked me and asked what had made me
change my mind.
“For two years, my life has consisted of nothing but the Zahir. Since I met you, I’ve been
following a long-forgotten path, an abandoned railway track with grass growing between
the rails, but which can still be used by trains. I haven’t yet reached the final station, so I
have no way of stopping along the way.”
He asked me if I had managed to get a visa. I explained that the Favor Bank had once
again come to my aid: a Russian friend had phoned his girlfriend, who was the director of
a major newspaper company in Kazakhstan. She had phoned the ambassador in Paris, and
the visa would be ready that afternoon.
“When do we leave?”
“Tomorrow. In order to buy the tickets, I just need to know your real name; the travel
agent is on the other line now.”
“Before you hang up, I’d just like to say one thing: I really liked what you said about the
distance between the tracks and what you said just now about the abandoned railway line,
but I don’t think that’s why you’re asking me to come with you. I think it’s because of
something you wrote once, and which I know by heart. Your wife was always quoting
these lines, and what they say is far more romantic than that business about the Favor
Bank:
A warrior of light knows that he has much to be grateful for.
 He was helped in his struggle by the angels; celestial forces placed each thing in its
place, thus allowing him to give of his best. That is why, at sunset, he kneels and gives
thanks for the Protective Cloak surrounding him.
 His companions say: “He’s so lucky!” But he knows that “luck” is knowing to look
around him and to see where his friends are, because it was through their words that the
angels were able to make themselves heard.

“I don’t always remember what I wrote, but thank you for that. Now I just need your
name to give to the travel agent.”

It takes twenty minutes for the taxi company to answer the phone. An irritated voice
tells me I’ll have to wait another half an hour. Marie seems happy in her exuberantly sexy
black dress, and I think of the Armenian restaurant and the man who admitted to feeling
aroused by the thought that his wife was desired by other men. I know that all the women
at the gala supper will be wearing outfits designed to make their breasts and curves the
center of attention, and that their husbands or boyfriends, knowing that their wives or
girlfriends are desired by other men, will think: “All right, have a good look, but keep
your distance, because she’s with me, she’s mine. I’m better than you are, because I have
something you’d all like to have.”
I’m not going to be doing any business, I’m not going to be signing contracts or giving
interviews; I am merely attending a ceremony, to repay a deposit made into my account
at the Favor Bank. I will sit next to someone boring at supper, someone who will ask me
where I find the inspiration for my books. Next to me, on the other side, a pair of breasts
will perhaps be on show, possibly belonging to the wife of a friend, and I will constantly
have to stop myself glancing down because, if I do, even for a second, she will tell her
husband that I was coming on to her. While we wait for the taxi, I draw up a list of
possible topics of conversation:

1. (a) Comments about people’s appearance: “You’re looking very elegant.” “What
a beautiful dress.” “Your skin’s looking fabulous.” When they go back home,
they’ll say how badly dressed everyone was and how ill they looked.
2. (b) Recent holidays: “You must visit Aruba, it’s fantastic.” “There’s nothing like
a summer night in Cancún, sipping a martini by the seashore.” In fact, no one
enjoys themselves very much on these holidays, they just experience a sense of
freedom for a few days and feel obliged to enjoy themselves because they spent
all that money.
3. (c) More holidays, this time to places which they feel free to criticize: “I was in
Rio de Janeiro recently—such a violent city.” “The poverty in the streets of
Calcutta is really shocking.” They only went to these places in order to feel
powerful while they were there and privileged when they came back to the mean
reality of their little lives, where at least there is no poverty or violence.
4. (d) New therapies: “Just one week of drinking wheatgrass juice really improves
the texture of your hair.” “I spent two days at a spa in Biarritz; the water there
opens the pores and eliminates toxins.” The following week, they will discover
that wheatgrass has absolutely no special properties and that any old hot water
will open the pores and eliminate toxins.
5. (e) Other people: “I haven’t seen so-and-so in ages—what’s he up to?” “I
understand that what’s-her-name is in financial difficulties and has had to sell her
apartment.” They can talk about the people who weren’t invited to the party in
question, they can criticize all they like, as long as they end by saying, with an
innocent, pitying air: “Still, he/she’s a wonderful person.”
6. (f) A few little complaints about life, just to add savor to the evening: “I wish
something new would happen in my life.” “I’m so worried about my children,
they never listen to proper music or read proper literature.” They wait for
comments from other people with the same problem and then feel less alone and
leave the party happy.
7. (g) At intellectual gatherings, like the one this evening, we will discuss the
Middle East conflict, the problem of Islamism, the latest exhibition, the latest
philosophy guru, the fantastic book that no one has heard of, the fact that music
isn’t what it used to be; we will offer our intelligent, sensible opinions, which run
completely counter to our real feelings—because we all know how much we hate
having to go to those exhibitions, read those unbearable books, or see those dreary
films, just so that we will have something to talk about on nights like tonight.

The taxi arrives, and while we are being driven to the venue I add another very personal
item to my list: I complain to Marie about how much I loathe these suppers. She reminds
me—and it’s true—that I always enjoy myself in the end and have a really good time.
We enter one of Paris’s most elegant restaurants and head for a room reserved for the
event—a presentation of a literary prize for which I was one of the judges. Everyone is
standing around talking; some people say hello and others merely look at me and make
some comment to each other; the organizer of the prize comes over to me and introduces
me to the people who are there, always with the same irritating words: “You know who
this gentleman is, of course.” Some people give a smile of recognition, others merely
smile and don’t recognize me at all, but pretend to know who I am, because to admit
otherwise would be to accept that the world they’re living in doesn’t exist, and that they
are failing to keep up with the things that matter.
I remember the tribe of the previous night and think: stupid people should all be
marooned on a ship on the high seas and forced to attend parties night after night, being
endlessly introduced to people for several months, until they finally manage to remember
who is who.
I draw up a catalog of the kind of people who attend events like this. Ten percent are
Members, the decision makers, who came out tonight because of some debt they owe to
the Favor Bank, but who always have an eye open for anything that might be of benefit to
their work—how to make money, where to invest. They can soon tell whether or not an
event is going to prove profitable or not, and they are always the first to leave the party;
they never waste their time.
Two percent are the Talents, who really do have a promising future; they have already
managed to ford a few rivers, have just become aware of the existence of the Favor Bank
and are all potential customers; they have important services to offer, but are not as yet in
a position to make decisions. They are nice to everyone because they don’t know who
exactly they are talking to, and they are more open-minded than the Members, because,
for them, any road might lead somewhere.
Three percent are what I call the Tupamaros—in homage to the former Uruguayan
guerrilla group. They have managed to infiltrate this party and are mad for any kind of
contact; they’re not sure whether to stay or to go on to another party that is taking place at
the same time; they are anxious; they want to show how talented they are, but they
weren’t invited, they haven’t scaled the first mountains, and as soon as the other guests
figure this out, they immediately withdraw any attention they have been paying them.
The last eighty-five percent are the Trays. I call them this because, just as no party can
exist without that particular utensil, so no event can exist without these guests. The Trays
don’t really know what is going on, but they know it’s important to be there; they are on
the guest list drawn up by the promoters because the success of something like this also
depends on the number of people who come. They are all ex-something-or-otherimportant—ex-bankers,
ex-directors, the ex-husband of some famous woman, the ex-wife
of some man now in a position of power. They are counts in a country where the
monarchy no longer exists, princesses and marchionesses who live by renting out their
castles. They go from one party to the next, from one supper to the next—don’t they ever
get sick of it, I wonder?
When I commented on this recently to Marie, she said that just as some people are
addicted to work, so others are addicted to fun. Both groups are equally unhappy,
convinced that they are missing something, but unable to give up their particular vice.
A pretty young blonde comes over while I’m talking to one of the organizers of a
conference on cinema and literature and tells me how much she enjoyed A Time to Rend
and a Time to Sew. She’s from one of the Baltic countries, she says, and works in film.
She is immediately identified by the group as a Tupamaro, because while appearing to be
interested in one thing (me), she is, in fact, interested in something else (the organizers of
the conference). Despite having made this almost unforgivable gaffe, there is still a
chance that she might be an inexperienced Talent. The organizer of the conference asks
what she means by “working in film.” The young woman explains that she writes film
reviews for a newspaper and has published a book (About cinema? No, about her life—
her short, dull life, I imagine).
She then commits the cardinal sin of jumping the gun and asking if she could be invited
to this year’s event. The organizer explains that the woman who publishes my books in
that same Baltic country, an influential and hardworking woman (and very pretty too, I
think to myself), has already been invited. They continue talking to me; the Tupamaro
lingers for a few more minutes, not knowing what to say, then moves off.
Given that it’s a literary prize, most of the guests tonight—Tupamaros, Talents, and
Trays—belong to the world of the arts. The Members, on the other hand, are either
sponsors or people connected with foundations that support museums, classical music
concerts, and promising young artists. After various conversations about which of the
candidates for the prize that night had applied most pressure in order to win, the master of
ceremonies mounts the stage, asks everyone to take their places at the tables (we all sit
down), makes a few jokes (it’s part of the ritual, and we all laugh), and says that the
winners will be announced between the entrée and the first course.
I am at the head table; this allows me to keep the Trays at a safe distance, and also means
that I don’t have to bother with any enthusiastic and self-interested Talents. I am seated
between the female director of a car-manufacturing firm, which is sponsoring the party,
and an heiress who has decided to invest in art. To my surprise, neither of them is
wearing a dress with a provocative décolletage. The other guests at our table are the
director of a perfumery; an Arab prince (who was doubtless passing through Paris and
was pounced on by one of the promoters to add luster to the event); an Israeli banker who
collects fourteenth-century manuscripts; the main organizer of tonight’s event; the French
consul to Monaco; and a blonde woman whose presence here I can’t quite fathom,
although I suspect she might be the organizer’s next mistress.
I have to keep putting on my glasses and surreptitiously reading the names of the people
on either side of me (I ought to be marooned on that imaginary ship and invited to this
same party dozens of times until I have memorized the names of all the guests). Marie, as
protocol demands, has been placed at another table; someone, at some point in history,
decided that at formal suppers couples should always be seated separately, thus leaving it
open to doubt whether the person beside us is married, single, or married but available.
Or perhaps someone thought that if a couple were seated together, they would simply talk
to each other; but, in that case, why go out—why take a taxi and go to the supper in the
first place?
As foreseen in my list of possible conversational topics, we begin with cultural small
talk—isn’t that a marvelous exhibition, wasn’t that an intelligent review…. I would like
to concentrate on the entrée—caviar with salmon and egg—but I am constantly
interrupted by the usual questions about how my new book is doing, where I find my
inspiration, whether I’m working on a new project. Everyone seems very cultured,
everyone manages to mention—as if by chance, of course—some famous person who
also happens to be a close friend. Everyone can speak cogently about the current state of
politics or about the problems facing culture.
“Why don’t we talk about something else?”
The question slips out inadvertently. Everyone at the table goes quiet. After all, it is
extremely rude to interrupt other people and worse still to draw attention to oneself. It
seems, however, that last night’s tour of the streets of Paris in the guise of a beggar has
caused some irreparable damage, which means that I can no longer stand such
conversations.
“We could talk about the acomodador: the moment in our lives when we decide to
abandon our desires and make do, instead, with what we have.”
No one seems very interested. I decide to change the subject.
“We could talk about the importance of forgetting the story we’ve been told and trying to
live an entirely different story. Try doing something different every day—like talking to
the person at the next table to you in a restaurant, visiting a hospital, putting your foot in
a puddle, listening to what another person has to say, allowing the energy of love to flow
freely, instead of putting it in a jug and standing it in a corner.”
“Are you talking about adultery?” asks the director of the perfumery.
“No, I mean allowing yourself to be the instrument of love, not its master, being with
someone because you really want to be, not because convention obliges you to be.”
With great delicacy, and just a touch of irony, the French consul to Monaco assures me
that all the people around our table are, of course, exercising that right and freedom.
Everyone agrees, although no one believes that it’s true.
“Sex!” cries the blonde woman whose role that evening no one has quite identified.
“Why don’t we talk about sex? It’s much more interesting and much less complicated!”
At least her remark is spontaneous. One of the women sitting next to me gives a wry
laugh, but I applaud.
“Sex is certainly more interesting, but I’m not sure it’s a different topic of conversation.
Besides, it’s no longer forbidden to talk about sex.”
“It’s also in extremely bad taste,” says one of my neighbors.
“May we know what is forbidden?” asks the organizer, who is starting to feel
uncomfortable.
“Well, money, for example. All of us around this table have money, or pretend that we
do. We assume we’ve been invited here because we’re rich, famous, and influential. But
have any of us ever thought of using this kind of event to find out what everyone actually
earns? Since we’re all so sure of ourselves, so important, why don’t we look at our world
as it is and not as we imagine it to be?”
“What are you getting at?” asks the director of the car-manufacturing firm.
“It’s a long story. I could start by talking about Hans and Fritz sitting in a bar in Tokyo
and go on to mention a Mongolian nomad who says we need to forget who we think we
are in order to become who we really are.”
“You’ve lost me.”
“That’s my fault. I didn’t really explain. But let’s get down to the nitty-gritty: I’d like to
know how much everyone here earns, what it means, in money terms, to be sitting at the
head table.”
There is a momentary silence—my gamble is not paying off. The other people around the
table are looking at me with startled eyes: asking about someone’s financial situation is a
bigger taboo than sex, more frowned upon than asking about betrayals, corruption, or
parliamentary intrigues.
However, the Arab prince—perhaps because he’s bored by all these receptions and
banquets with their empty chatter, perhaps because that very day he has been told by his
doctor that he is going to die, or perhaps for some other reason—decides to answer my
question:
“I earn about twenty thousand euros a month, depending on the amount approved by the
parliament in my country. That bears no relation to what I spend, though, because I have
an unlimited so-called entertainment allowance. In other words, I am here courtesy of the
embassy’s car and chauffeur; the clothes I’m wearing belong to the government; and
tomorrow I will be traveling to another European country in a private jet, with the cost of
pilot, fuel, and airport taxes deducted from that allowance.”
And he concludes:
“Apparent reality is not an exact science.”
If the prince can speak so frankly, and given that he is, hierarchically, the most important
person at the table, the others cannot possibly embarrass him by remaining silent. They
are going to have to participate in the game, the question, and the embarrassment.
“I don’t know exactly how much I earn,” says the organizer, one of the Favor Bank’s
classic representatives, known to some as a lobbyist. “Somewhere in the region of ten
thousand euros a month, but I, too, have an entertainment allowance from the various
organizations I head. I can deduct everything—suppers, lunches, hotels, air tickets,
sometimes even clothes—although I don’t have a private jet.”
The wine has run out; he signals to a waiter and our glasses are refilled. Now it was the
turn of the director of the car-manufacturing firm, who, initially, had hated the idea of
talking about money, but who now seems to be rather enjoying herself.
“I reckon I earn about the same, and have the same unlimited entertainment allowance.”
One by one, everyone confessed how much they earned. The banker was the richest of
them all, with ten million euros a year, as well as shares in his bank that were constantly
increasing in value.
When it came to the turn of the young blonde woman who had not been introduced to
anyone, she refused to answer:
“That’s part of my secret garden. It’s nobody’s business but mine.”
“Of course it isn’t, but we’re just playing a game,” said the organizer.
The woman refused to join in, and by doing so, placed herself on a higher level than
everyone else: after all, she was the only one in the group who had secrets. However, by
placing herself on a higher level, she only succeeded in earning everyone else’s scorn.
Afraid of feeling humiliated by her miserable salary, she had, by acting all mysterious,
managed to humiliate everyone else, not realizing that most of the people there lived
permanently poised on the edge of the abyss, utterly dependent on those entertainment
allowances that could vanish overnight.
The question inevitably came around to me.
“It depends. In a year when I publish a new book, I could earn five million euros. If I
don’t publish a book, then I earn about two million from royalties on existing titles.”
“You only asked the question so that you could say how much you earned,” said the
young woman with the “secret garden.” “No one’s impressed.”
She had realized that she had made a wrong move earlier on and was now trying to
correct the situation by going on the attack.
“On the contrary,” said the prince. “I would have expected a leading author like yourself
to be far wealthier.”
A point to me. The blonde woman would not open her mouth again all night.
The conversation about money broke a series of taboos, given that how much people earn
was the biggest of them all. The waiter began to appear more frequently, the bottles of
wine began to be emptied with incredible speed, the emcee-cum-organizer rather tipsily
mounted the stage, announced the winner, presented the prize, and immediately rejoined
the conversation, which had carried on even though politeness demands that we keep
quiet when someone else is talking. We discussed what we did with our money (this
consisted mostly of buying “free time,” traveling, or practicing a sport).
I thought of changing tack and asking them what kind of funeral they would like—death
was as big a taboo as money—but the atmosphere was so buoyant and everyone was so
full of talk that I decided to say nothing.
“You’re all talking about money, but you don’t know what money is,” said the banker.
“Why do people think that a bit of colored paper, a plastic card, or a coin made out of
fifth-rate metal has any value? Worse still, did you know that your money, your millions
of dollars, are nothing but electronic impulses?”
Of course we did.
“Once, wealth was what these ladies are wearing,” he went on. “Ornaments made from
rare materials that were easy to transport, count, and share out. Pearls, nuggets of gold,
precious stones. We all carried our wealth in a visible place. Such things were, in turn,
exchanged for cattle or grain, because no one walks down the street carrying cattle or
sacks of grain. The funny thing is that we still behave like some primitive tribe—we wear
our ornaments to show how rich we are, even though we often have more ornaments than
money.”
“It’s the tribal code,” I said. “In my day, young people wore their hair long, whereas
nowadays they all go in for body piercing. It helps them identify like-minded people,
even though it can’t buy anything.”
“Can our electronic impulses buy one extra hour of life? No. Can they buy back those
loved ones who have departed? No. Can they buy love?”
“They can certainly buy love,” said the director of the car-manufacturing firm in an
amused tone of voice.
Her eyes, however, betrayed a terrible sadness. I thought of Esther and of what I had said
to the journalist in the interview I had given that morning. We rich, powerful, intelligent
people knew that, deep down, we had acquired all these ornaments and credit cards only
in order to find love and affection and to be with someone who loved us.
“Not always,” said the director of the perfumery, turning to look at me.
“No, you’re right, not always. After all, my wife left me, and I’m a wealthy man. But
almost always. By the way, does anyone at this table know how many cats and how many
lampposts there are on the back of a ten-dollar bill?”
No one knew and no one was interested. The comment about love had completely spoiled
the jolly atmosphere, and we went back to talking about literary prizes, exhibitions, the
latest film, and the play that was proving to be such an unexpected success.

How was it on your table?”
“Oh, the usual.”
“Well, I managed to spark an interesting discussion about money, but, alas, it ended in
tragedy.”
“When do you leave?”
“I have to leave here at half past seven in the morning. Since you’re flying to Berlin, we
could share a taxi.”
“Where are you going?”
“You know where I’m going. You haven’t asked me, but you know.”
“Yes, I know.”
“Just as you know that we’re saying goodbye at this very moment.”
“We could go back to the time when we first met: a man in emotional tatters over
someone who had left him, and a woman madly in love with her neighbor. I could repeat
what I said to you once: ‘I’m going to fight to the bitter end.’ Well, I fought and I lost,
and now I’ll just have to lick my wounds and leave.”
“I fought and lost as well. I’m not trying to sew up what was rent. Like you, I want to
fight to the bitter end.”
“I suffer every day, did you know that? I’ve been suffering for months now, trying to
show you how much I love you, how things are only important when you’re by my side.
But now, whether I suffer or not, I’ve decided that enough is enough. It’s over. I’m tired.
After that night in Zagreb, I lowered my guard and said to myself: If the blow comes, it
comes. It can lay me out on the canvas, it can knock me out cold, but one day I’ll
recover.”
“You’ll find someone else.”
“Of course I will: I’m young, pretty, intelligent, desirable, but will I experience all the
things I experienced with you?”
“You’ll experience different emotions and, you know, although you may not believe it, I
loved you while we were together.”
“I’m sure you did, but that doesn’t make it any the less painful. We’ll leave in separate
taxis tomorrow. I hate goodbyes, especially at airports or train stations.”
THE RETURN TO ITHACA

We’ll sleep here tonight and, tomorrow, we’ll continue on horseback. My car can’t
cope with the sand of the steppes.”
We were in a kind of bunker, which looked like a relic from the Second World War. A
man, with his wife and his granddaughter, welcomed us and showed us a simple, but
spotlessly clean room.
Dos went on:
“And don’t forget to choose a name.”
“I don’t think that’s necessary,” said Mikhail.
“Of course it is,” insisted Dos. “I was with his wife recently. I know how she thinks, I
know what she has learned, I know what she expects.”
Dos’s voice was simultaneously firm and gentle. Yes, I would choose a name, I would do
exactly as he suggested; I would continue to discard my personal history and, instead,
embark on my personal legend—even if only out of sheer tiredness.
I was exhausted. The previous night I had slept for two hours at most: my body had still
not adjusted to the enormous time difference. I had arrived in Almaty at about eleven
o’clock at night local time, when in France it was only six o’clock in the evening.
Mikhail had left me at the hotel and I had dozed for a bit, then woken up in the small
hours. I had looked out at the lights below and thought how in Paris it would just be time
to go out to supper. I was hungry and asked room service if they could send me up
something to eat: “Of course we can, sir, but you really must try to sleep; if you don’t,
your body will stay stuck on its European timetable.”
For me, the worst possible torture is not being able to sleep. I ate a sandwich and decided
to go for a walk. I asked the receptionist my usual question: “Is it dangerous to go
walking at this hour?” He told me it wasn’t, and so I set off down the empty streets,
narrow alleyways, broad avenues; it was a city like any other, with its neon signs, the
occasional passing police car, a beggar here, a prostitute there. I had to keep repeating out
loud: “I’m in Kazakhstan!” If I didn’t, I would end up thinking I was merely in some
unfamiliar quarter of Paris.
“I’m in Kazakhstan!” I said to the deserted city, and a voice replied:
“Of course you are.”
I jumped. A man was sitting close by, on a bench in a square at dead of night, with his
backpack by his side. He got up and introduced himself as Jan, from Holland, adding:
“And I know why you’re here.”
Was he a friend of Mikhail’s? Or was I being followed by the secret police?
“Why am I here, then?”
“Like me, you’ve traveled from Istanbul, following the Silk Road.”
I gave a sigh of relief, and decided to continue the conversation.
“On foot? As I understand it, that means crossing the whole of Asia.”
“It’s something I needed to do. I was dissatisfied with my life. I’ve got money, a wife,
children, I own a hosiery factory in Rotterdam. For a time, I knew what I was fighting
for—my family’s stability. Now I’m not so sure. Everything that once made me happy
just bores me, leaves me cold. For the sake of my marriage, the love of my children, and
my enthusiasm for my work, I decided to take two months off just for myself, and to take
a long look at my life. And it’s working.”
“I’ve been doing the same thing these last few months. Are there a lot of pilgrims like
you?”
“Lots of them. Loads. It can be dangerous, because the political situation in some of these
countries is very tricky indeed, and they hate Westerners. But we get by. I think that, as a
pilgrim, you’ll always be treated with respect, as long as you can prove you’re not a spy.
But I gather from what you say that you have different reasons for being here. What
brings you to Almaty?”
“The same thing as you. I came to reach the end of a particular road. Couldn’t you sleep
either?”
“I’ve just woken up. The earlier I set out, the more chance I have of getting to the next
town; if not, I’ll have to spend the night in the freezing cold steppes, with that constant
wind blowing.”
“Have a good journey, then.”
“No, stay a while. I need to talk, to share my experiences. Most of the other pilgrims
don’t speak English.”
And he started telling me about his life, while I tried to remember what I knew about the
Silk Road, the old commercial route that connected Europe with the countries of the East.
The traditional route started in Beirut, passed through Antioch and went all the way to the
shores of the Yangtse in China; but in Central Asia it became a kind of web, with roads
heading off in all directions, which allowed for the establishment of trading posts, which,
in time, became towns, which were later destroyed in battles between rival tribes, rebuilt
by the inhabitants, destroyed, and rebuilt again. Although almost everything passed along
that route—gold, strange animals, ivory, seeds, political ideas, refugees from civil wars,
armed bandits, private armies to protect the caravans—silk was the rarest and most
coveted item. It was thanks to one of these branch roads that Buddhism traveled from
China to India.
“I left Antioch with about two hundred dollars in my pocket,” said the Dutchman, having
described mountains, landscapes, exotic tribes, and endless problems in various countries
with police patrols. “I needed to find out if I was capable of becoming myself again. Do
you know what I mean?”
“Yes, I do.”
“I was forced to beg, to ask for money. To my surprise, people are much more generous
than I had imagined.”
Beg? I studied his backpack and his clothes to see if I could spot the symbol of the
tribe—Mikhail’s tribe—but I couldn’t find it.
“Have you ever been to an Armenian restaurant in Paris?”
“I’ve been to lots of Armenian restaurants, but never in Paris.”
“Do you know someone called Mikhail?”
“It’s a pretty common name in these parts. If I did know a Mikhail, I can’t remember, so
I’m afraid I can’t help you.”
“No, I don’t need your help. I’m just surprised by certain coincidences. It seems there are
a lot of people, all over the world, who are becoming aware of the same thing and acting
in a very similar way.”
“The first thing you feel, when you set out on a journey like this, is that you’ll never
arrive. Then you feel insecure, abandoned, and spend all your time thinking about giving
up. But if you can last a week, then you’ll make it to the end.”
“I’ve been wandering like a pilgrim through the streets of one city, and yesterday I
arrived in a different one. May I bless you?”
He gave me a strange look.
“I’m not traveling for religious reasons. Are you a priest?”
“No, I’m not a priest, but I feel that I should bless you. Some things aren’t logical, as you
know.”
The Dutchman called Jan, whom I would never see again, bowed his head and closed his
eyes. I placed my hands on his shoulders and, in my native tongue—which he wouldn’t
understand—I prayed that he would reach his destination safely and leave behind him on
the Silk Road both his sadness and his sense that life was meaningless; I prayed, too, that
he would return to his family with shining eyes and with his soul washed clean.
He thanked me, took up his backpack, and headed off in the direction of China. I went
back to the hotel thinking that I had never, in my whole life, blessed anyone before. But I
had responded to an impulse, and the impulse was right; my prayer would be answered.

The following day, Mikhail turned up with his friend, Dos, who would accompany us.
Dos had a car, knew my wife, and knew the steppes, and he, too, wanted to be there when
I reached the village where Esther was living.
I considered remonstrating with them—first, it was Mikhail, now it was his friend, and by
the time we finally reached the village, there would be a huge crowd following me,
applauding and weeping, waiting to see what would happen. But I was too tired to say
anything. The next day, I would remind Mikhail of the promise he had made, not to allow
any witnesses to that moment.
We got into the car and, for some time, followed the Silk Road. They asked me if I knew
what it was and I told them that I had met a Silk Road pilgrim the previous night, and
they said that such journeys were becoming more and more commonplace and could soon
bring benefits to the country’s tourist industry.
Two hours later, we left the main road and continued along a minor road as far as the
bunker where we are now, eating fish and listening to the soft wind that blows across the
steppes.
“Esther was very important for me,” Dos explains, showing me a photo of one of his
paintings, which includes one of those pieces of bloodstained cloth. “I used to dream of
leaving here, like Oleg…”
“You’d better call me Mikhail, otherwise he’ll get confused.”
“I used to dream of leaving here, like lots of people my age. Then one day, Oleg—or,
rather, Mikhail—phoned me. He said that his benefactress had decided to come and live
in the steppes for a while and he wanted me to help her. I agreed, thinking that here was
my chance and that perhaps I could extract the same favors from her: a visa, a plane
ticket, and a job in France. She asked me to go with her to some remote village that she
knew from an earlier visit.
“I didn’t ask her why, I simply did as she requested. On the way, she insisted on going to
the house of a nomad she had visited years before. To my surprise, it was my grandfather
she wanted to see! She was received with the hospitality that is typical of the people who
live in this infinite space. My grandfather told her that, although she thought she was sad,
her soul was, in fact, happy and free, and love’s energy had begun to flow again. He
assured her that this would have an effect upon the whole world, including her husband.
My grandfather taught her many things about the culture of the steppes, and asked me to
teach her the rest. In the end, he decided that she could keep her name, even though this
was contrary to tradition.
“And while she learned from my grandfather, I learned from her, and realized that I
didn’t need to go far away, as Mikhail had done: my mission was to be in this empty
space—the steppes—and to understand its colors and transform them into paintings.”
“I don’t quite understand what you mean about teaching my wife. I thought your
grandfather said that we should forget everything.”
“I’ll show you tomorrow,” said Dos.

And the following day, he did show me and there was no need for words. I saw the
endless steppes, which, although they appeared to be nothing but desert, were, in fact, full
of life, full of creatures hidden in the low scrub. I saw the flat horizon, the vast empty
space, heard the sound of horses’ hooves, the quiet wind, and then, all around us, nothing,
absolutely nothing. It was as if the world had chosen this place to display, at once, its
vastness, its simplicity, and its complexity. It was as if we could—and should—become
like the steppes—empty, infinite, and, at the same time, full of life.
I looked up at the blue sky, took off my dark glasses, and allowed myself to be filled by
that light, by the feeling of being simultaneously nowhere and everywhere. We rode on in
silence, stopping now and then to let the horses drink from streams that only someone
who knew the place would have been able to find. Occasionally, we would see other
horsemen in the distance or shepherds with their flocks, framed by the plain and by the
sky.
Where was I going? I hadn’t the slightest idea and I didn’t care. The woman I was
looking for was somewhere in that infinite space. I could touch her soul, hear the song
she was singing as she wove her carpets. Now I understood why she had chosen this
place: there was nothing, absolutely nothing to distract her attention; it was the emptiness
she had so yearned for. The wind would gradually blow her pain away. Could she ever
have imagined that one day I would be here, on horseback, riding to meet her?
A sense of paradise descends from the skies. And I am aware that I am living through an
unforgettable moment in my life; it is the kind of awareness we often have precisely
when the magic moment has passed. I am entirely here, without past, without future,
entirely focused on the morning, on the music of the horses’ hooves, on the gentleness of
the wind caressing my body, on the unexpected grace of contemplating sky, earth, men. I
feel a sense of adoration and ecstasy. I am thankful for being alive. I pray quietly,
listening to the voice of nature, and understanding that the invisible world always
manifests itself in the visible world.
I ask the sky some questions, the same questions I used to ask my mother when I was a
child:

Why do we love certain people and hate others?
Where do we go after we die?
Why are we born if, in the end, we die?
What does God mean?

The steppes respond with the constant sound of the wind. And that is enough: knowing
that the fundamental questions of life will never be answered, and that we can,
nevertheless, still go forward.

Mountains loomed on the horizon, and Dos asked us to stop. I saw that there was a
stream nearby.
“We’ll camp here.”
We removed the saddlebags from the horses and put up the tent. Mikhail started digging a
hole in the ground.
“This is how the nomads used to do it; we dig a hole, fill the bottom with stones, put
more stones all around the edge, and that way we have a place to light a fire without the
wind bothering us.”
To the south, between the mountains and us, a cloud of dust appeared, which I realized at
once was caused by galloping horses. I pointed this out to my two friends, who jumped to
their feet. I could see that they were tense. Then they exchanged a few words in Russian
and relaxed. Dos went back to putting up the tent and Mikhail set about lighting the fire.
“Would you mind telling me what’s going on?” I said.
“It may look as if we’re surrounded by empty space, but it can’t have escaped your notice
that we’ve already seen all kinds of things: shepherds, rivers, tortoises, foxes, and
horsemen. It feels as if we had a clear view all around us, so where do these people come
from? Where are their houses? Where do they keep their flocks?
“That sense of emptiness is an illusion: we are constantly watching and being watched.
To a stranger who cannot read the signs of the steppes, everything is under control and
the only thing he can see are the horses and the riders. To those of us who were brought
up here, we can also see the yurts, the circular houses that blend in with the landscape.
We know how to read what’s going on by observing how horsemen are moving and in
which direction they’re heading. In the olden days, the survival of the tribe depended on
that ability, because there were enemies, invaders, smugglers.
“And now the bad news: they’ve found out that we’re riding toward the village at the foot
of those mountains and are sending people to kill the shaman who sees visions of
children as well as the man who has come to disturb the peace of the foreign woman.”
He gave a loud laugh.
“Just wait a moment and you’ll understand.”
The riders were approaching, and I was soon able to see what was going on.
“It looks very odd to me—a woman being pursued by a man.”
“It is odd, but it’s also part of our lives.”
The woman rode past us, wielding a long whip, and, by way of a greeting, gave a shout
and a smile directed at Dos, then started galloping around and around the place where we
were setting up camp. The smiling, sweating man pursuing her gave us a brief greeting
too, all the while trying to keep up with the woman.
“Nina shouldn’t be so cruel,” said Mikhail. “There’s no need for all this.”
“It’s precisely because there’s no need for it that she can afford to be cruel,” replied Dos.
“She just has to be beautiful and have a good horse.”
“But she does this to everyone.”
“I unseated her once,” said Dos proudly.
“The fact that you’re speaking English means that you want me to understand.”
The woman was laughing and riding ever faster; her laughter filled the steppes with joy.
“It’s a form of flirtation. It’s called Kyz Kuu, or ‘Bring the girl down.’ And we’ve all
taken part in it at some time in our childhood or youth.”
The man pursuing her was getting closer and closer, but we could see that his horse
couldn’t take much more.
“Later on, we’ll talk a bit about Tengri, the culture of the steppes,” Dos went on. “But
now that you’re seeing this, let me just explain something very important. Here, in this
land, the woman is in charge. She comes first. In the event of a divorce, she receives half
the dowry back even if she’s the one who wants the divorce. Whenever a man sees a
woman wearing a white turban, that means she’s a mother and we, as men, must place
our hand on our heart and bow our head as a sign of respect.”
“But what’s that got to do with ‘Bring the girl down’?”
“In the village at the foot of the mountains, a group of men on horseback would have
gathered around this girl; her name is Nina and she’s the most desirable girl in the area.
They would have begun playing the game of Kyz Kuu, which was thought up in ancient
times, when the women of the steppes, known as amazons, were also warriors.
At the time, no one would have dreamt of consulting the family if they wanted to get
married: the suitors and the girl would simply get together in a particular place, all on
horseback. She would ride around the men, laughing, provoking them, whipping them.
Then the bravest of the men would start chasing her. If the girl was able to keep out of his
grasp for a set period of time, then the man would have to call on the earth to cover him
forever, because he would be considered a bad horseman—the warrior’s greatest shame.
If he got close, despite her whip, and pulled her to the ground, then he was a real man and
was allowed to kiss her and to marry her. Obviously, then just as now, the girls knew who
they should escape from and who they should let themselves be caught by.”
Nina was clearly just having a bit of fun. She had got ahead of the man again and was
riding back to the village.
“She only came to show off. She knows we’re on our way and will take the news back to
the village.”
“I have two questions. The first might seem stupid: Do you still choose your brides like
that?”
Dos said that, nowadays, it was just a game. In the West, people got all dressed up and
went to bars or fashionable clubs, whereas in the steppes, Kyz Kuu was the favored game
of seduction. Nina had already humiliated quite a number of young men, and had allowed
herself to be unseated by a few as well—exactly as happens in all the best discotheques.
“The second question will seem even more idiotic: Is the village at the foot of the
mountains where my wife is living?”
Dos nodded.
“If we’re only two hours away, why don’t we sleep there? It’ll be a while yet before it
gets dark.”
“You’re right, we are only two hours away, and there are two reasons why we’re
stopping here for the night. First, even if Nina hadn’t come out here, someone would
already have seen us and would have gone to tell Esther that we were coming. This way,
she can decide whether or not she wants to see us, or if she would prefer to go to another
village for a few days. If she did that, we wouldn’t follow her.”
My heart contracted.
“Even after all I’ve been through to get here?”
“If that’s how you feel, then you have understood nothing. What makes you think that
your efforts should be rewarded with the submission, gratitude, and recognition of the
person you love? You came here because this was the road you must follow, not in order
to buy your wife’s love.”
However unfair his words might seem, he was right. I asked him about the second reason.
“You still haven’t chosen your name.”
“That doesn’t matter,” Mikhail said again. “He doesn’t understand our culture, and he’s
not part of it.”
“It’s important to me,” said Dos. “My grandfather said that I must protect and help the
foreign woman, just as she protected and helped me. I owe Esther the peace of my eyes,
and I want her eyes to be at peace too.
“He will have to choose a name. He will have to forget forever his history of pain and
suffering, and accept that he is a new person who has just been reborn and that, from now
on, he will be reborn every day. If he doesn’t do that, and if they ever do live together
again, he will expect her to pay him back for all the pain she once caused him.”
“I chose a name last night,” I said.
“Wait until this evening to tell me.”

As soon as the sun began to sink low on the horizon, we went to an area on the steppes
that was full of vast sand dunes. I became aware of a different sound, a kind of resonance,
an intense vibration. Mikhail said that it was one of the few places in the world where the
dunes sing.
“When I was in Paris and I talked to people about this, they only believed me because an
American said that he had experienced the same thing in North Africa; there are only
thirty places like it in the world. Nowadays, of course, scientists can explain everything.
It seems that because of the place’s unique formation, the wind penetrates the actual
grains of sand and creates this sound. For the ancients, though, this was one of the
magical places in the steppes, and it is a great honor that Dos should have chosen it for
your name-changing.”
We started climbing one of the dunes, and as we proceeded the noise grew more intense
and the wind stronger. When we reached the top, we could see the mountains standing
out clearly to the south and the gigantic plain stretching out all around us.
“Turn toward the west and take off your clothes,” Dos said.
I did as he ordered, without asking why. I started to feel cold, but they seemed
unconcerned about my well-being. Mikhail knelt down and appeared to be praying. Dos
looked up at the sky, at the earth, at me, then placed his hands on my shoulders, just as I
had done to the Dutchman, though without knowing why.
“In the name of the Lady, I dedicate you. I dedicate you to the earth, which belongs to the
Lady. In the name of the horse, I dedicate you. I dedicate you to the world, and pray that
the world helps you on your journey. In the name of the steppes, which are infinite, I
dedicate you. I dedicate you to the infinite Wisdom, and pray that your horizon may
always be wider than you can see. You have chosen your name and will speak it now for
the first time.”
“In the name of the infinite steppes, I choose a name,” I replied, without asking if I was
doing as the ritual demanded, merely allowing myself to be guided by the noise of the
wind in the dunes. “Many centuries ago, a poet described the wanderings of a man called
Ulysses on his way back to an island called Ithaca, where his beloved awaits him. He
confronts many perils, from storms to the temptations of comfort. At one point, in a cave,
he encounters a monster with only one eye.
“The monster asks him his name. ‘Nobody,’ says Ulysses. They fight and he manages to
pierce the monster’s one eye with his sword and then seals the mouth of the cave with a
rock. The monster’s companions hear his cries and rush to help him. Seeing that there is a
rock covering the mouth of the cave, they ask who is with him. ‘Nobody! Nobody!’
replies the monster. His companions leave, since there is clearly no threat to the
community, and Ulysses can then continue on his journey back to the woman who waits
for him.”
“So your name is Ulysses?”
“My name is Nobody.”
I am trembling all over, as if my skin were being pierced by hundreds of needles.
“Focus on the cold, until you stop trembling. Let the cold fill your every thought, until
there is no space for anything else, until it becomes your companion and your friend. Do
not try to control it. Do not think about the sun, that will only make it worse, because you
will know then that something else—heat—exists and then the cold will feel that it is not
loved or desired.”
My muscles were furiously stretching and contracting in order to produce energy and
keep my organism alive. However, I did as Dos ordered, because I trusted him, trusted in
his calm, his tenderness, and his authority. I let the needles pierce my skin, allowed my
muscles to struggle, my teeth to chatter, all the while repeating to myself: “Don’t fight;
the cold is your friend.” My muscles refused to obey, and I remained like that for almost
fifteen minutes, until my muscles eventually gave in and stopped shaking, and I entered a
state of torpor. I tried to sit down, but Mikhail grabbed hold of me and held me up, while
Dos spoke to me. His words seemed to come from a long way off, from a place where the
steppes meet the sky.
“Welcome, nomad who crosses the steppes. Welcome to the place where we always say
that the sky is blue even when it is gray, because we know that the color is still there
above the clouds. Welcome to the land of the Tengri. Welcome to me, for I am here to
receive you and to honor you for your search.”
Mikhail sat down on the ground and asked me to drink something that immediately
warmed my blood. Dos helped me to get dressed, and we made our way back down the
dunes that continued to talk among themselves; we made our way back to our improvised
campsite. Before Dos and Mikhail had even started cooking, I had fallen into a deep
sleep.

What’s happening? Isn’t it light yet?”
“It’s been light for ages. It’s just a sandstorm, don’t worry. Put your dark glasses on to
protect your eyes.”
“Where’s Dos?”
“He’s gone back to Almaty, but he was very moved by the ceremony yesterday evening.
He didn’t really need to do that. It was a bit of a waste of time for you really and a great
opportunity to catch pneumonia. I hope you realize that it was just his way of showing
you how welcome you are. Here, take the oil.”
“I overslept.”
“It’s only a two-hour ride to the village. We’ll be there before the sun is at its highest
point.”
“I need a bath. I need to change my clothes.”
“That’s impossible. You’re in the middle of the steppes. Put the oil in the pan, but first
offer it up to the Lady. Apart from salt, it’s our most valuable commodity.”
“What is Tengri?”
“The word means ‘sky worship’; it’s a kind of religion without religion. Everyone has
passed through here—Buddhists, Hindus, Catholics, Muslims, different sects with their
beliefs and superstitions. The nomads became converts to avoid being killed, but they
continued and continue to profess the idea that the Divinity is everywhere all the time.
You can’t take the Divinity out of nature and put it in a book or between four walls. I’ve
felt so much better since coming back to the steppes, as if I had been in real need of
nourishment. Thank you for letting me come with you.”
“Thank you for introducing me to Dos. Yesterday, during that dedication ceremony, I
sensed that he was someone special.”
“He learned from his grandfather, who learned from his father, who learned from his
father, and so on. The nomadic way of life, and the absence of a written language until
the end of the nineteenth century, meant that they had to develop the tradition of the akyn,
the person who must remember everything and pass on the stories. Dos is an akyn. When
I say ‘learn,’ though, I hope you don’t take that to mean ‘accumulate knowledge.’ The
stories have nothing to do with dates and names and facts. They are legends about heroes
and heroines, animals and battles, about the symbols of man’s essential self, not just his
deeds. They’re not stories about the vanquishers or the vanquished, but about people who
travel the world, contemplate the steppes, and allow themselves to be filled by the energy
of love. Pour the oil in more slowly, otherwise it will spit.”
“I felt blessed.”
“I’d like to feel that too. Yesterday, I went to visit my mother in Almaty. She asked if I
was well and if I was earning money. I lied and said I was fine, that I was putting on a
successful theater production in Paris. I’m going back to my own people today, and it’s
as if I had left yesterday, and as if during all the time I’ve spent abroad, I had done
nothing of any importance. I talk to beggars, wander the streets with the tribe, organize
the meetings at the restaurant, and what have I achieved? Nothing. I’m not like Dos, who
learned from his grandfather. I only have the presence to guide me and sometimes I think
that perhaps it is just a hallucination; perhaps my visions really are just epileptic fits, and
nothing more.”
“A minute ago you were thanking me for bringing you with me, and now it seems to have
brought you nothing but sadness. Make up your mind what you’re feeling.”
“I feel both things at once, I don’t have to choose. I can travel back and forth between the
oppositions inside me, between my contradictions.”
“I want to tell you something, Mikhail. I too have traveled back and forth between many
contradictions since I first met you. I began by hating you, then I accepted you, and as
I’ve followed in your footsteps, that acceptance has become respect. You’re still young,
and the powerlessness you feel is perfectly normal. I don’t know how many people your
work has touched so far, but I can tell you one thing: you changed my life.”
“You were only interested in finding your wife.”
“I still am, but that didn’t just make me travel across the Kazakhstan steppes: it made me
travel through the whole of my past life. I saw where I went wrong, I saw where I
stopped, I saw the moment when I lost Esther, the moment that the Mexican Indians call
the acomodador—the giving-up point. I experienced things I never imagined I would
experience at my age. And all because you were by my side, guiding me, even though
you might not have been aware that you were. And do you know something else? I
believe that you do hear voices and that you did have visions when you were a child. I
have always believed in many things, and now I believe even more.”
“You’re not the same man I first met.”
“No, I’m not. I hope Esther will be pleased.”
“Are you?”
“Of course.”
“Then that’s all that matters. Let’s have something to eat, wait until the storm eases, and
then set off.”
“Let’s face the storm.”
“No, it’s all right. Well, we can if you want, but the storm isn’t a sign, it’s just one of the
consequences of the destruction of the Aral Sea.”

The furious wind is abating, and the horses seem to be galloping faster. We enter a
kind of valley, and the landscape changes completely. The infinite horizon is replaced by
tall, bare cliffs. I look to the right and see a bush full of ribbons.
“It was here! It was here that you saw…”
“No, my tree was destroyed.”
“So what’s this, then?”
“A place where something very important must have happened.”
He dismounts, opens his saddlebag, takes out a knife, and cuts a strip off the sleeve of his
shirt, then ties this to one of the branches. His eyes change; he may be feeling the
presence beside him, but I prefer not to ask.
I follow his example. I ask for protection and help. I, too, feel a presence by my side: my
dream, my long journey back to the woman I love.
We remount. He doesn’t tell me what he asked for, and nor do I. Five minutes later, we
see a small village of white houses. A man is waiting for us; he comes over to Mikhail
and speaks to him in Russian. They talk for a while, then the man goes away.
“What did he want?”
“He wanted me to go to his house to cure his daughter. Nina must have told him I was
arriving today, and the older people still remember my visions.”
He seems uncertain. There is no one else around; it must be a time when everyone is
working, or perhaps eating. We were crossing the main road, which seemed to lead to a
white building surrounded by a garden.
“Remember what I told you this morning, Mikhail. You might well just be an epileptic
who refuses to accept the diagnosis and who has allowed his unconscious to build a
whole story around it, but it could also be that you have a mission in the world: to teach
people to forget their personal history and to be more open to love as pure, divine
energy.”
“I don’t understand you. All the months we’ve known each other, you’ve talked of
nothing but this moment—finding Esther. And suddenly, ever since this morning, you
seem more concerned about me than anything else. Perhaps Dos’s ritual last night had
some effect.”
“Oh, I’m sure it did.”
What I meant to say was: I’m terrified. I want to think about anything except what is
about to happen in the next few minutes. Today, I am the most generous person on the
face of this earth, because I am close to my objective and afraid of what awaits me. My
reaction is to try and help others, to show God that I’m a good person and that I deserve
this blessing that I have pursued so long and hard.

Mikhail dismounted and asked me to do the same.
“I’m going to the house of the man whose daughter is ill. I’ll take care of your horse
while you talk to Esther.”
He pointed to the small white building in the middle of the trees.
“Over there.”
I struggled to keep control of myself.
“What does she do?”
“As I told you before, she’s learning to make carpets and, in exchange, she teaches
French. By the way, although the carpets may look simple, they are, in fact, very
complicated—just like the steppes. The dyes come from plants that have to be picked at
precisely the right time; otherwise the color won’t be right. Then the wool is spread out
on the ground, mixed with hot water, and the threads are made while the wool is still wet;
and then, after many days, when the sun has dried them, the work of weaving begins. The
final details are done by children. Adult hands are too big for the smallest, most delicate
bits of embroidery.”
He paused.
“And no jokes about it being child’s play. It’s a tradition that deserves respect.”
“How is she?”
“I don’t know. I haven’t spoken to her for about six months.”
“Mikhail, these carpets are another sign.”
“The carpets?”
“Do you remember yesterday, when Dos asked me to choose my name, I told you the
story of a warrior who returns to an island in search of his beloved? The island is called
Ithaca and the woman is called Penelope. What do you think Penelope has been doing
since Ulysses left? Weaving! She has been weaving a shroud for her father-in-law,
Laertes, as a way of putting off her suitors. Only when she finishes the shroud will she
remarry. While she waits for Ulysses to return, she unpicks her work every night and
begins again the following day.
“Her suitors want her to choose one of them, but she dreams of the return of the man she
loves. Finally, when she has grown weary of waiting, Ulysses returns.”
“Except that the name of this village isn’t Ithaca and Esther’s name isn’t Penelope.”
Mikhail had clearly not understood the story, and I didn’t feel like explaining that it was
just an example.
I handed him the reins of my horse and then walked the hundred meters that separated me
from the woman who had been my wife, had then become the Zahir, and who was once
more the beloved whom all men dream of finding when they return from war or from
work.

I am filthy. My clothes and my face are caked with sand, my body drenched in sweat,
even though it’s very cold.
I worry about my appearance, the most superficial thing in the world, as if I had made
this long journey to my personal Ithaca merely in order to show off my new clothes. As I
walk the remaining hundred meters, I must make an effort to think of all the important
things that have happened during her—or was it my?—absence.
What should I say when we meet? I have often pondered this and come up with such
phrases as: “I’ve waited a long time for this moment,” or “I know now that I was wrong,”
or “I came here to tell you that I love you,” or even “You’re lovelier than ever.”
I decide just to say hello. As if she had never left. As if only a day had passed, not two
years, nine months, eleven days, and eleven hours.
And she needs to understand that I have changed as I’ve traveled through the same places
she traveled through, places about which I knew nothing or in which I had simply never
been interested. I had seen the scrap of bloodstained cloth in the hand of a beggar, in the
hands of young people and adults in a Paris restaurant, in the hand of a painter, a doctor,
and a young man who claimed to see visions and hear voices. While I was following in
her footsteps, I had gotten to know the woman I had married and had rediscovered, too,
the meaning of my own life, which had been through so many changes and was now
about to change again.
Despite being married all those years, I had never really known my wife. I had created a
love story like the ones I’d seen in the movies, read about in books and magazines,
watched on TV. In my story, love was something that grew until it reached a certain size
and, from then on, it was just a matter of keeping it alive, like a plant, watering it now
and again and removing any dead leaves. Love was also a synonym for tenderness,
security, prestige, comfort, success. Love could be translated into smiles, into words like
“I love you” or “I feel so happy when you come home.”
But things were more complicated than I thought. I could be madly in love with Esther
while I was crossing the road, and yet, by the time I had reached the other side, I could be
feeling trapped and wretched at having committed myself to someone, and longing to be
able to set off once more in search of adventure. And then I would think: “I don’t love
her anymore.” And when love returned with the same intensity as before, I would doubt it
and say to myself: “I must have just gotten used to it.”
Perhaps Esther had had the same thoughts and had said to herself: “Don’t be silly, we’re
happy, we can spend the rest of our lives like this.” After all, she had read the same
stories, seen the same films, watched the same TV series, and although none of them said
that love was anything more than a happy ending, why give herself a hard time about it?
If she repeated every morning that she was happy with her life, then she would doubtless
end up believing it herself and making everyone around us believe it too.
However, she thought differently and acted differently. She tried to show me, but I
couldn’t see. I had to lose her in order to understand that the taste of things recovered is
the sweetest honey we will ever know. Now I was there, walking down a street in a tiny,
cold, sleepy village, once again following a road because of her. The first and most
important thread that bound me—“All love stories are the same”—had broken when I
was knocked down by that motorbike.
In the hospital, love had spoken to me: “I am everything and I am nothing. I am the wind,
and I cannot enter windows and doors that are shut.”
And I said to love: “But I am open to you.”
And love said to me: “The wind is made of air. There is air inside your house, but
everything is shut up. The furniture will get covered in dust, the damp will ruin the
paintings and stain the walls. You will continue to breathe, you will know a small part of
me, but I am not a part, I am Everything, and you will never know that.”
I saw that the furniture was covered in dust, that the paintings were being corroded by
damp, and I had no alternative but to open the windows and doors. When I did that, the
wind swept everything away. I wanted to cling to my memories, to protect what I thought
I had worked hard to achieve, but everything had disappeared and I was as empty as the
steppes.
As empty as the steppes: I understood now why Esther had decided to come here. It was
precisely because everything was empty that the wind brought with it new things, noises I
had never heard, people with whom I had never spoken. I recovered my old enthusiasm,
because I had freed myself from my personal history; I had destroyed the acomodador
and discovered that I was a man capable of blessing others, just as the nomads and
shamans of the steppes blessed their fellows. I had discovered that I was much better and
much more capable than I myself had thought; age only slows down those who never had
the courage to walk at their own pace.
One day, because of a woman, I made a long pilgrimage in order to find my dream. Many
years later, the same woman had made me set off again, this time to find the man who
had gotten lost along the way.
Now I am thinking about everything except important things: I am mentally humming a
tune, I wonder why there aren’t any cars parked here, I notice that my shoe is rubbing,
and that my wristwatch is still on European time.
And all because a woman, my wife, my guide, and the love of my life, is now only a few
steps away; anything to fend off the reality I have so longed for and which I am so afraid
to face.
I sit down on the front steps of the house and smoke a cigarette. I think about going back
to France. I’ve reached my goal, why go on?
I get up. My legs are trembling. Instead of setting off on the return journey, I clean off as
much sand from my clothes and my face as I can, grasp the door handle, and go in.

Although I know that I may have lost forever the woman I love, I must try to enjoy all the
graces that God has given me today. Grace cannot be hoarded. There are no banks where
it can be deposited to be used when I feel more at peace with myself. If I do not make full
use of these blessings, I will lose them forever.
 God knows that we are all artists of life. One day, he gives us a hammer with which to
make sculptures, another day he gives us brushes and paints with which to make a
picture, or paper and a pencil to write with. But you cannot make a painting with a
hammer, or a sculpture with a paintbrush. Therefore, however difficult it may be, I must
accept today’s small blessings, even if they seem like curses because I am suffering and
it’s a beautiful day, the sun is shining, and the children are singing in the street. This is
the only way I will manage to leave my pain behind and rebuild my life.

The room was flooded with light. She looked up when I came in and smiled, then
continued reading A Time to Rend and a Time to Sew to the women and children sitting
on the floor, with colorful fabrics all around them. Whenever Esther paused, they would
repeat the words, keeping their eyes on their work.
I felt a lump in my throat, I struggled not to cry, and then I felt nothing. I just stood
studying the scene, hearing my words on her lips, surrounded by colors and light and by
people entirely focused on what they were doing.

In the words of a Persian sage: Love is a disease no one wants to get rid of. Those who
catch it never try to get better, and those who suffer do not wish to be cured.

Esther closed the book. The women and children looked up and saw me.
“I’m going for a stroll with a friend of mine who has just arrived,” she told the group.
“Class is over for today.”
They all laughed and bowed. She came over and kissed my cheek, linked arms with me,
and we went outside.

“Hello,” I said.
“I’ve been waiting for you,” she said.
I embraced her, rested my head on her shoulder, and began to cry. She stroked my hair,
and by the way she touched me I began to understand what I did not want to understand, I
began to accept what I did not want to accept.
“I’ve waited for you in so many ways,” she said, when she saw that my tears were
abating. “Like a desperate wife who knows that her husband has never understood her
life, and that he will never come to her, and so she has no option but to get on a plane and
go back, only to leave again after the next crisis, then go back and leave and go back….”
The wind had dropped; the trees were listening to what she was saying.
“I waited as Penelope waited for Ulysses, as Romeo waited for Juliet, as Beatrice waited
for Dante. The empty steppes were full of memories of you, of the times we had spent
together, of the countries we had visited, of our joys and our battles. Then I looked back
at the trail left by my footprints and I couldn’t see you.
“I suffered greatly. I realized that I had set off on a path of no return and that when one
does that, one can only go forward. I went to the nomad I had met before and asked him
to teach me to forget my personal history, to open me up to the love that is present
everywhere. With him I began to learn about the Tengri tradition. One day, I glanced to
one side and saw that same love reflected in someone else’s eyes, in the eyes of a painter
called Dos.”
I said nothing.
“I was still very bruised. I couldn’t believe it was possible to love again. He didn’t say
much; he taught me to speak Russian and told me that in the steppes they use the word
‘blue’ to describe the sky even when it’s gray, because they know that, above the clouds,
the sky is always blue. He took me by the hand and helped me to go through those
clouds. He taught me to love myself rather than to love him. He showed me that my heart
was at the service of myself and of God, and not at the service of others.
“He said that my past would always go with me, but that the more I freed myself from
facts and concentrated on emotions, the more I would come to realize that in the present
there is always a space as vast as the steppes waiting to be filled up with more love and
with more of life’s joy.
“Finally, he explained to me that suffering occurs when we want other people to love us
in the way we imagine we want to be loved, and not in the way that love should manifest
itself—free and untrammeled, guiding us with its force and driving us on.”
I looked up at her.
“And do you love him?”
“I did.”
“Do you still love him?”
“What do you think? If I did love another man and was told that you were about to arrive,
do you think I would still be here?”
“No, I don’t. I think you’ve been waiting all morning for the door to open.”
“Why ask silly questions, then?”
Out of insecurity, I thought. But it was wonderful that she had tried to find love again.
“I’m pregnant.”
For a second, it was as if the world had fallen in on me.
“By Dos?”
“No. It was someone who stayed for a while and then left again.”
I laughed, even though my heart was breaking.
“Well, I suppose there’s not much else to do here in this one-horse town,” I said.
“Hardly a one-horse town,” she replied, laughing too.
“But perhaps it’s time you came back to Paris. Your newspaper phoned me asking if I
knew where to find you. They wanted you to report on a NATO patrol in Afghanistan,
but you’ll have to say no.”
“Why?”
“Because you’re pregnant! You don’t want the baby being exposed to all the negative
energy of a war, surely.”
“The baby? You don’t think a baby’s going to stop me working, do you? Besides, why
should you worry? You didn’t do anything to contribute.”
“Didn’t contribute? It’s thanks to me that you came here in the first place. Or doesn’t that
count?”
She took a piece of bloodstained cloth from the pocket of her white dress and gave it to
me, her eyes full of tears.
“This is for you. I’ve missed our arguments.”
And then, after a pause, she added:
“Ask Mikhail to get another horse.”
I placed my hands on her shoulders and blessed her just as I had been blessed.


'Just off the beach to the west of the village lies an island, and on it is a vast
temple with many bells,' said the woman.
The boy noticed that she was dressed strangely and had a veil covering her
head. He had never seen her before.
'Have you ever visited that temple?' she asked. 'Go there and tell me what you
think of it?'
Seduced by the woman's beauty, the boy went to the place she had indicated.
He sat down on the beach and stared out at the horizon, but he saw only what he
always saw: blue sky and ocean.
Disappointed, he walked to a nearby fishing village and asked if anyone there
knew about an island and a temple.
'Oh, that was many years ago, when my great-grandparents were alive,' said an
old fisherman. 'There was an earthquake, and the island was swallowed up by the sea.
But although we can no longer see the island, we can still hear the temple bells when
the ocean sets them swinging down below.'
The boy went back to the beach and tried to hear the bells. He spent the whole
afternoon there, but all he heard was the noise of the waves and the cries of the
seagulls.
When night fell, his parents came looking for him. The following morning, he
went back to the beach; he could not believe that such a beautiful woman would have
lied to him. If she ever returned, he could tell her that, although he had not seen the
island, he had heard the temple bells set ringing by the motion of the waves.
4
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
Many months passed; the woman did not return and the boy forgot all about
her; now he was convinced that he needed to discover the riches and treasures in the
submerged temple. If he could hear the bells, he would be able to locate it and salvage
the treasure hidden below.
He lost interest in school and even in his friends. He became the butt of all the
other children's jokes. They used to say: 'He's not like us. He prefers to sit looking at
the sea because he's afraid of being beaten in our games.'
And they all laughed to see the boy sitting on the shore.
Although he still could not hear the old temple bells ringing, the boy
nevertheless learned about other things. He began to realise that he had grown so used
to the sound of the waves that he was no longer distracted by them. Soon after that, he
became used to the cries of the seagulls, the buzzing of the bees and the wind blowing
amongst the palm trees.
Six months after his first conversation with the woman, the boy could sit there
oblivious to all other noises, but he still could not hear the bells from the drowned
temple.
Fishermen came and talked to him, insisting that they had heard the bells.
But the boy never did.
Some time later, however, the fishermen changed their tune: 'You spend far too
much time thinking about the bells beneath the sea. Forget about them and go back to
playing with your friends. Perhaps it's only fishermen who can hear them.'
After almost a year, the boy thought: 'Perhaps they're right. I would do better
to grow up and become a fisherman and come down to this beach every morning,
5
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
because I've come to love it here.' And he thought too: 'Perhaps it's just another legend
and the bells were all shattered during the earthquake and have never rung out since.'
That afternoon, he decided to go back home.
He walked down to the ocean to say goodbye. He looked once more at the
natural world around him and because he was no longer concerned about the bells, he
could again smile at the beauty of the seagulls' cries, the roar of the sea and the wind
blowing in the palm trees. Far off, he heard the sound of his friends playing and he
felt glad to think that he would soon resume his childhood games.
The boy was happy and - as only a child can - he felt grateful for being alive.
He was sure that he had not wasted his time, for he had learned to contemplate Nature
and to respect it.
Then, because he was listening to the sea, the seagulls, the wind in the palm
trees and the voices of his friends playing, he also heard the first bell.
And then another.
And another, until, to his great joy, all the bells in the drowned temple were
ringing.
Years later, when he was a grown man, he returned to the village and to the
beach of his childhood. He no longer dreamed of finding treasure at the bottom of the
sea; perhaps that had all been a mere product of his imagination, and he had never in
fact heard the submerged bells ring out on one lost childhood afternoon. Even so, he
decided to walk for a while along the beach, to listen to the noise of the wind and to
the cries of the seagulls.
Imagine his surprise when, there on the beach, he saw the woman who had
first spoken to him about the island and its temple.
6
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
'What are you doing here?' he asked.
'I was waiting for you,' she replied.
He noticed that, despite the passing years, the woman looked exactly the same;
the veil hiding her hair had not faded with time.
She handed him a blue notebook full of blank pages.
'Write: a warrior of light values a child's eyes because they are able to look at
the world without bitterness. When he wants to find out if the person beside him is
worthy of his trust, he tries to see him as a child would.'
'What is a warrior of light?'
'You already know that,' she replied with a smile. 'He is someone capable of
understanding the miracle of life, of fighting to the last for something he believes in -
and of hearing the bells that the waves sets ringing on the seabed.'
He had never thought of himself as a warrior of light. The woman seemed to
read his thoughts. 'Everyone is capable of these things. And though no one thinks of
themselves as a warrior of light, we all are.'
He looked at the blank pages in the notebook. The woman smiled again.
'Write about that warrior,' she said.
7
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The Manual of the Warrior of Light
8
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light knows that he has much to be grateful for.
He was helped in his struggle by the angels; celestial forces placed each thing
in its place, thus allowing him to give of his best.
His companions say: 'He's so lucky!' And the warrior does sometimes achieve
things far beyond his capabilities.
That is why, at sunset, he kneels and gives thanks for the Protective Cloak
surrounding him.
His gratitude, however, is not limited to the spiritual world; he never forgets
his friends, for their blood mingled with his on the battlefield.
A warrior does not need to be reminded of the help given him by others; he is
the first to remember and makes sure to share with them any rewards he receives.
9
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
All the world's roads lead to the heart of the warrior; he plunges unhesitatingly
into the river of passions always flowing through his life.
The warrior knows that he is free to choose his desires, and he makes these
decisions with courage, detachment and - sometimes - with just a touch of madness.
He embraces his passions and enjoys them intensely. He knows that there is no
need to renounce the pleasures of conquest; they are part of life and bring joy to all
those who participate in them.
But he never loses sight of those things that last or of the strong bonds that are
forged over time.
A warrior can distinguish between the transient and the enduring.
10
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light does not rely on strength alone, he makes use of his
opponent's energy too.
When he enters the fight, all he has is his enthusiasm and the moves and
strikes that he learned during his training. As the fight progresses, he discovers that
enthusiasm and training are not enough to win: what counts is experience.
Then he opens his heart to the Universe and asks God to give him the
inspiration he needs to turn every blow from his enemy into a lesson in self-defence.
His companions say: 'He's so superstitious. He stopped fighting in order to
pray; he even shows respect for his opponent's tricks.'
The warrior does not respond to these provocations. He knows that without
inspiration and experience, no amount of training will help him.
11
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light never resorts to trickery, but he knows how to distract his
opponent.
However anxious he is, he uses every strategy at his disposal to gain his
objective. When he sees that his strength is almost gone, he makes his enemy think
that he is simply biding his time. When he needs to attack the right flank, he moves
his troops to the left. If he intends beginning the battle at once, he pretends instead
that he is tired and prepares for sleep.
His friends say: 'Look, he's lost all enthusiasm.' But he pays no attention to
such remarks because his friends do not understand his tactics.
A warrior of light knows what he wants. And he has no need to waste time on
explanations.
12
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A wise Chinese has this to say about the strategies of the warrior of light:
'Convince your enemy that he will gain very little by attacking you; this will
diminish his enthusiasm.'
'Do not be ashamed to make a temporary withdrawal from the field if you see
that your enemy is stronger than you; it is not winning or losing a single battle that
matters, but how the war ends.'
'Even if you are very strong, never be ashamed to feign weakness; this will
make your enemy act imprudently and attack too soon.'
'In war, the key to victory is the ability to surprise one's opponent.'
13
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
'It's odd,' says the warrior of light to himself. 'I have met so many people who,
at the first opportunity, try to show their very worst qualities. They hide their inner
strength behind aggression; they hide their fear of loneliness behind an air of
independence. They do not believe in their own abilities, but are constantly
trumpeting their virtues.'
The warrior reads these messages in many of the men and women he meets.
He is never taken in by appearances and makes a point of remaining silent when
people try to impress him. And he uses the occasion to correct his own faults, for
other people make an excellent mirror.
A warrior takes every opportunity to teach himself.
14
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light sometimes fights with those he loves.
The man who defends his friends is never overwhelmed by the storms of life;
he is strong enough to come through difficulties and to carry on.
However, he is often faced by challenges from those to whom he is trying to
teach the art of the sword. His disciples provoke him into fighting with them.
And the warrior demonstrates his abilities: with just a few blows he disarms
his students, and harmony returns to the place where they meet.
'Why bother to do that, when you are so much better than they are?' asks a
traveller.
'Because in challenging me, what they really want is to talk to me and this is
my way of keeping dialogue open,' replies the warrior.
15
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
Before embarking on an important battle, a warrior of light asks himself: 'How
far have I developed my abilities?'
He knows that he has learned something with every battle he has fought, but
many of those lessons have caused him unnecessary suffering. More than once he has
wasted his time fighting for a lie. And he has suffered for people who did not deserve
his love.
Victors never make the same mistake twice. That is why the warrior only risks
his heart for something worthwhile.
16
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light respects the main teaching of the I Ching: 'To persevere is
favourable.'
He knows that perseverance is not the same thing as insistence. There are
times when battles go on longer than necessary, draining him of strength and
enthusiasm.
At such moments, the warrior thinks: 'A prolonged war finally destroys the
victors too.'
Then he withdraws his forces from the battlefield and allows himself a respite.
He perseveres in his desire, but knows he must wait for the best moment to attack.
A warrior always returns to the fray. He never does so out of stubbornness, but
because he has noticed a change in the weather.
17
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light knows that certain moments repeat themselves.
He often finds himself faced by the same problems and situations, and seeing
these difficult situations return, he grows depressed, thinking that he is incapable of
making any progress in life.
'I've been through all this before,' he says to his heart.
'Yes, you have been through all this before,' replies his heart. 'But you have
never been beyond it.'
Then the warrior realises that these repeated experiences have but one aim: to
teach him what he does not want to learn.
18
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light is never predictable.
He might dance down the street on his way to work, gaze into the eyes of a
complete stranger and speak of love at first sight, or else defend an apparently absurd
idea. Warriors of light allow themselves days like these.
He is not afraid to weep over ancient sorrows or to feel joy at new discoveries.
When he feels that the moment has arrived, he drops everything and goes off on some
long-dreamed-of adventure. When he realises that he can do no more, he abandons the
fight, but never blames himself for having committed a few unexpected acts of folly.
A warrior does not spend his days trying to play the role that others have
chosen for him.
19
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
Warriors of light always keep a certain gleam in their eyes.
They are of this world, they are part of the lives of other people and they set
out on their journey with no saddlebags and no sandals. They are often cowardly.
They do not always make the right decisions.
They suffer over the most trivial things, they have mean thoughts and
sometimes believe they are incapable of growing. They frequently deem themselves
unworthy of any blessing or miracle.
They are not always quite sure what they are doing here. They spend many
sleepless nights, believing that their lives have no meaning.
That is why they are warriors of light. Because they make mistakes. Because
they ask themselves questions. Because they are looking for a reason - and are sure to
find it.
20
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light does not worry that, to others, his behaviour might seem
quite mad.
He talks out loud to himself when he is alone. Someone told him that this is
the best way of communicating with the angels, and so he takes a chance and tries to
make contact.
At first, he finds this very difficult. He thinks that he has nothing to say, that
he will just repeat the same meaningless twaddle. Even so, the warrior persists. He
spends all day talking to his heart. He says things with which he does not agree, he
talks utter nonsense.
One day, he notices a change in his voice. He realises that he is acting as a
channel for some higher wisdom.
The warrior may seem mad, but this is just a disguise.
21
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
According to a poet: 'The warrior of light chooses his enemies.'
He knows what he is capable of; he does not have to go about the world
boasting of his qualities and virtues. Nevertheless, there is always someone who
wants to prove himself better than he is.
For the warrior, there is no 'better' or 'worse': everyone has the necessary gifts
for his particular path.
But certain people insist. They provoke and offend and do everything they can
to irritate him. At that point, his heart says: 'Do not respond to these insults, they will
not increase your abilities. You will tire yourself needlessly.'
A warrior of light does not waste his time listening to provocations; he has a
destiny to fulfil.
22
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light remembers a passage from John Bunyan:
'Although I have been through all that I have, I do not regret the many
hardships I met, because it was they who brought me to the place I wished to reach.
Now all I have is this sword and I give it to whomever wishes to continue his
pilgrimage. I carry with me the marks and scars of battles - they are the witnesses of
what I suffered and the rewards of what I conquered.
These are the beloved marks and scars that will open the gates of Paradise to
me. There was a time when I used to listen to tales of bravery. There was a time when
I lived only because I needed to live. But now I live because I am a warrior and
because I wish one day to be in the company of Him for whom I have fought so hard.'
23
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The moment that he begins to walk along it, the warrior of light recognises the
Path.
Each stone, each bend cries welcome to him. He identifies with the mountains
and the streams, he sees something of his own soul in the plants and the animals and
the birds of the field.
Then, accepting the help of God and of God's Signs, he allows his Personal
Legend to guide him towards the tasks that life has reserved for him.
On some nights, he has nowhere to sleep, on others, he suffers from insomnia.
'That's just how it is,' thinks the warrior. 'I was the one who chose to walk this path.'
In these words lies all his power: he chose the path along which he is walking
and so has no complaints.
24
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
From now on - and for the next few hundred years - the Universe is going to
help warriors of light and hinder the prejudiced.
The Earth's energy needs to be renewed.
New ideas need space.
Body and soul need new challenges.
The future has become the present, and every dream - except those dreams that
involve preconceived ideas - will have a chance to be heard.
Anything of importance will remain; anything useless will disappear.
However, it is not the warrior's responsibility to judge the dreams of others, and he
does not waste time criticising other people's decisions.
In order to have faith in his own path, he does not need to prove that someone
else's path is wrong.
25
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light carefully studies the position that he intends to conquer.
However difficult the objective, there is always a way of overcoming
obstacles. He seeks out alternative paths, he sharpens his sword, he tries to fill his
heart with the necessary perseverance to face the challenge.
But as he advances, the warrior realises that there are difficulties he had not
reckoned with.
If he waits for the ideal moment, he will never set off; he requires a touch of
madness to take the next step.
The warrior uses that touch of madness. For - in both love and war - it is
impossible to foresee everything.
26
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light knows his own faults. But he also knows his qualities.
Some of his companions complain all the time that 'other people have more
opportunities than we do'.
Perhaps they are right, but a warrior does not allow himself to be paralysed by
this; he tries to make the most of his virtues.
He knows that the gazelle's power lies in its strong legs. The power of the
seagull lies in the accuracy with which it can spear a fish. He has learned that the
reason the tiger does not fear the hyena is because he is aware of his own strength.
He tries to establish what he can truly rely on. And he always checks that he
carries three things with him: faith, hope and love.
If these three things are there, he does not hesitate to go forward.
27
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light knows that no one is stupid and that life teaches everyone
- however long that may take.
He always does his best and expects the best of others. Through his generosity,
he tries to show each person how much they are capable of achieving.
Some of his companions say: 'Some people are so ungrateful.'
The warrior is not discouraged by this. And he continues to encourage other
people because this is also a way of encouraging himself.
28
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
Every warrior of light has felt afraid of going into battle.
Every warrior of light has, at some time in the past, lied or betrayed someone.
Every warrior of light has trodden a path that was not his.
Every warrior of light has suffered for the most trivial of reasons.
Every warrior of light has, at least once, believed that he was not a warrior of
light.
Every warrior of light has failed in his spiritual duties.
Every warrior of light has said 'yes' when he wanted to say 'no'.
Every warrior of light has hurt someone he loved.
That is why he is a warrior of light, because he has been through all this and
yet has never lost hope of being better than he is.
29
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior always listens to the words of certain older thinkers, such as these
by T.H.Huxley:
'The consequences of our actions are the scarecrows of fools and the beacons
of wise men.'
'The chess-board is the world; the pieces are the gestures of our daily lives; the
rules of the game are what we call the laws of Nature. The player on the other side is
hidden from us, but we know that his play is always fair, just and patient.'
The warrior simply has to accept the challenge. He knows that God never
overlooks a single mistake made by those he loves nor does he allow his favourites to
pretend ignorance of the rules of the game.
30
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light does not postpone making decisions.
He thinks a good deal before he acts; he considers his training, as well as his
responsibilities and duties as a teacher. He tries to remain calm and to analyse each
step as if it were of supreme importance.
However, as soon as he has made a decision, the warrior proceeds: he has no
doubts about his chosen action nor does he change direction if circumstances turn out
differently from how he had imagined them.
If his decision is correct, he will win the battle, even if it lasts longer than
expected. If his decision is wrong, he will be defeated and he will have to start all
over again - only this time with more wisdom.
But once he has started, a warrior of light perseveres until the end.
31
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior knows that his best teachers are the people with whom he shares the
battlefield.
It is dangerous to ask for advice. It is even more dangerous to give advice.
When he needs help, he tries to see how his friends resolve - or fail to resolve - their
problems.
If he is in search of inspiration, he reads on the lips of his neighbour the words
that his guardian angel is trying to say to him.
When he is tired or lonely, he does not dream about distant men and women;
he turns to the person beside him and shares his sorrow or his need for affection with
them - with pleasure and without guilt.
A warrior knows that the farthest-flung star in the Universe reveals itself in the
things around him.
32
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light shares his world with the people he loves.
He tries to encourage them to do the things they would like to do but for which
they lack the courage; at such times, the Enemy appears holding two wooden signs in
his hand.
On one sign is written: 'Think about yourself. Keep all the blessings for
yourself, otherwise you'll end up losing everything.'
On the other sign, he reads: 'Who do you think you are, helping other people?
Can't you see your own faults?'
A warrior knows that he has faults. But he knows too that he cannot do his
growing alone and thus distance himself from his companions.
Therefore, he throws the two signs to the floor, even if he thinks they may
contain a grain of truth. The signs crumble into dust, and the warrior continues to
encourage those nearest him.
33
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The philosopher Lao Tzu says of the journey of the warrior of light:
'The Path involves respect for all small and subtle things. Learn to recognise
the right moment to take the necessary attitudes.'
'Even if you have already fired a bow several times, continue to pay attention
to how you position the arrow and how you flex the string.'
'When a beginner knows what he needs, he proves more intelligent than an
absent-minded sage.'
'Accumulating love brings luck, accumulating hatred brings calamity. Anyone
who fails to recognise problems leaves the door open for tragedies to rush in.'
'The battle is not the same as the quarrel.'
34
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light meditates.
He sits in a quiet place in his tent and surrenders himself to the divine light.
When he does this, he tries not to think about anything; he shuts himself off from the
search for pleasure, from challenges and revelations, and allows his gifts and powers
to reveal themselves.
Even if he does not recognise them then, these gifts and powers are taking care
of his life and will influence his day-to-day existence.
While he meditates, the warrior is not himself, but a spark from the Soul of the
World. These are the moments that give him an understanding of his responsibilities
and of how he should behave accordingly.
A warrior of light knows that in the silence of his heart he will hear an order
that will guide him.
35
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
'When I draw my bow,' says Herrigel to his Zen master, 'there comes a point
when I feel as if I will get breathless if I do not let fly at once.'
'If you continue to try and provoke the moment when you must release the
arrow, you will never learn the art of the archer,' says his master. 'Sometimes, it is the
archer's own over-active desire that ruins the accuracy of the shot.'
A warrior of light sometimes thinks: 'If I do not do something, it will not be
done.'
It is not quite like that: he must act, but he must allow room for the Universe
to act too.
36
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
When a warrior is the victim of some injustice, he usually tries to be alone, in
order not to show his pain to others.
This is both good and bad.
It is one thing to allow one's heart to heal its wounds slowly, but it is quite
another to sit all day in deep contemplation for fear of seeming weak.
Inside each of us there lives an angel and a devil, and their voices are very
alike. Confronted by a problem, the devil encourages that solitary conversation, trying
to show us how vulnerable we are. The angel makes us reflect upon our attitudes and
occasionally needs someone else's mouth to reveal itself.
A warrior balances solitude and dependence.
37
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light needs love.
Love and affection are as much a part of his nature as eating and drinking and
a taste for the Good Fight. When the warrior watches a sunset and feels no joy, then
something is wrong.
At this point, he stops fighting and goes in search of company, so that they can
watch the setting sun together.
If he has difficulty in finding company, he asks himself: 'Was I too afraid to
approach someone? Did I receive affection and not even notice?'
A warrior of light makes use of solitude, but is not used by it.
38
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light knows that it is impossible to live in a state of complete
relaxation.
He has learned from the archer that, in order to shoot his arrow any distance,
he must hold the bow taut. He has learned from the stars that only an inner explosion
allows them to shine. The warrior notices that when a horse is about to jump over a
fence, it tenses all its muscles.
But he never confuses tension with anxiety.
39
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light always manages to balance Rigour and Mercy.
To attain his dream, he needs a strong will and an enormous capacity for
acceptance; although he may have an objective, the path that leads to that objective is
not always as he imagined it would be.
That is why the warrior uses a mixture of discipline and compassion. God
never abandons His children, but His purposes are unfathomable, and He builds the
road with our own steps.
The warrior uses that combination of discipline and acceptance to fuel his
enthusiasm. Routine was never at the head of any important new movement.
40
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light sometimes behaves like water, flowing around the
obstacles he encounters.
Occasionally, resisting might mean being destroyed, and so he adapts to the
circumstances. He accepts without complaint that the stones along the path hinder his
way across the mountains.
Therein lies the strength of water: it cannot be shattered by a hammer or
wounded by a knife. The strongest sword in the world cannot scar its surface.
The waters of a river adapt themselves to whatever route proves possible, but
never forgets its one objective: the sea. So fragile at its source, it gradually gathers the
strength of the other rivers it encounters.
And, after a certain point, its power is absolute.
41
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
For the warrior of light, there are no abstractions.
Everything is concrete and everything is meaningful. He does not sit
comfortably in his tent, observing what is going on in the world; he accepts each
challenge as an opportunity to transform himself.
Some of his companions spend their lives moaning about their lack of choice
or passing comment on the decisions made by other people. The warrior, however,
transforms his thinking into action.
Sometimes he chooses the wrong goal and pays the price for his mistake
without complaint. At others, he swerves from the path and wastes a great deal of time
only to end up back where he started.
But the warrior never allows himself to be discouraged.
42
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light has the qualities of a rock.
When he is on flat terrain, everything around him is in harmony and he
remains stable. People can build their houses upon him, and the storm will not destroy
them.
When, however, he is placed on a slope, and the things around him show
neither balance nor respect, then he reveals his strength; he rolls towards the enemy
that is threatening his peace. At such moments, the warrior is a devastating force, and
no one can stop him.
A warrior of light thinks about both war and peace and knows how to act in
accordance with the circumstances.
43
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light who trusts too much in his intelligence will end up
underestimating the power of his opponent.
It is important not to forget that sometimes strength is more effective than
strategy.
A bullfight lasts fifteen minutes; the bull quickly learns that it is being tricked,
and its next step is to charge the bullfighter. When that happens, no amount of
brilliance, argument, intelligence or charm can avert tragedy.
That is why the warrior never underestimates brute force. When it proves too
violent, he withdraws from the battlefield until his enemy has exhausted himself.
44
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light knows when an enemy is stronger than he is.
If he decides to confront him, he will be destroyed instantly. If he responds to
his provocations, he will fall into a trap. So he uses diplomacy to resolve the difficult
situation in which he finds himself. When the enemy behaves like a baby, he does the
same. When he challenges him to a fight, he pretends not to understand.
His friends say: 'He's a coward.'
But the warrior pays no attention; he knows that all the rage and courage of a
little bird are as nothing to a cat.
In such situations, the warrior remains patient; the enemy will soon go off in
search of others to provoke.
45
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light is never indifferent to injustice.
He knows that all is one and that each individual action affects everyone on
the planet. That is why, when confronted by the suffering of others, he uses his sword
to restore order.
But even though he fights against oppression, at no point does he attempt to
judge the oppressor. Each person will answer for his actions before God and so, once
the warrior has completed his task, he makes no further comment.
A warrior of light is in the world in order to help his fellow man and not in
order to condemn his neighbour.
46
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light is never cowardly.
Flight might be an excellent form of defence, but it cannot be used when one
is very afraid. When in doubt, the warrior prefers to face defeat and then lick his
wounds, because he knows that if he flees he is giving to the aggressor greater power
than he deserves.
In difficult and painful times, the warrior faces overwhelming odds with
heroism, resignation and courage.
47
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light is never in a hurry.
Time works in his favour; he learns to master his impatience and avoids acting
without thinking.
By walking slowly, he becomes aware of the firmness of his step. He knows
that he is taking part in a decisive moment in the history of humanity and that he
needs to change himself before he can transform the world. That is why he remembers
the words of Lanza del Vasto: 'A revolution takes time to settle in.'
A warrior never picks the fruit while it is still green.
48
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light needs both patience and speed.
The two worst strategic mistakes to make are: acting prematurely and letting
an opportunity slip; to avoid this, the warrior treats each situation as if it were unique
and never resorts to formulae, recipes or other people's opinions.
The caliph Moauiyat asked Omr Ben Al-Aas the secret of his great political
skills:
'I never get involved in something without having first worked out my retreat;
then again, I have never gone into a situation and immediately wanted to run straight
out again,' came the answer.
49
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light often loses heart.
He believes that nothing can stir in him the emotion he so desired. He is forced
to spend many evenings and nights feeling that he is one of the vanquished, and
nothing seems able to restore his enthusiasm.
His friends say: 'Perhaps his fight is over.'
The warrior feels pain and confusion when he hears such remarks because he
knows that he has not yet reached the place he wanted to reach. But he is stubborn and
refuses to relinquish his aims.
Then, when he least expects it, a new door opens.
50
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light always keeps his heart free of any feelings of hatred.
When he goes into battle, he remembers what Christ said: 'Love your
enemies.' And he obeys.
But he knows that the act of forgiveness does not mean that he must accept
everything; a warrior cannot bow his head, for if he did he would lose sight of the
horizon of his dreams.
He accepts that his opponents are there to test his valour, his persistence, his
ability to make decisions. They force him to fight for his dreams.
It is the experience of battle that strengthens the warrior of light.
51
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior remembers the past.
He knows about man's Spiritual Quest, he knows that this Quest has been
responsible for some of history's finest pages.
But also some of history's worst chapters: massacres, sacrifices, obscurantism.
It was used for personal ends and has seen its ideas used to defend the most terrible of
intentions.
The warrior has heard people ask: 'How am I to know that the path I am on is
the right path?' And he has seen many people abandon their quest because they could
not answer that question.
The warrior has no doubts; he follows one infallible saying:
'By their fruits ye shall know them,' said Jesus. That is the rule he follows, and
he never goes wrong.
52
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light knows the importance of intuition.
In the midst of battle, he does not have time to think about the enemy's blows,
and so he uses his instinct and obeys his angel.
In times of peace, he deciphers the signs that God sends him.
People say: 'He's mad.'
Or: 'He lives in a fantasy world.'
Or even: 'How can he possibly believe in such illogical things?'
But the warrior knows that intuition is God's alphabet and he continues
listening to the wind and talking to the stars.
53
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light sits around a fire with his companions.
They talk about his conquests, and any strangers who join the group are made
welcome because everyone is proud of his life and of his Good Fight. The warrior
speaks enthusiastically about the path, he tells how he resisted a particular challenge
or speaks of the solution he found to one especially difficult situation. When he tells
stories, he invests his words with passion and romance.
Sometimes, he exaggerates a little. He remembers that at times his ancestors
used to exaggerate too.
That is why he does the same thing. But he never confuses pride with vanity,
and he never believes his own exaggerations.
54
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior hears someone say: 'I need to understand everything before I can
make a decision. I want to have the freedom to change my mind.'
The warrior regards these words suspiciously. He too can enjoy that freedom,
but this does not prevent him from taking on a commitment, even if he does not know
quite why he does so.
A warrior of light makes decisions. His soul is as free as the clouds in the sky,
but he is committed to his dream. On his freely chosen path, he often has to get up
earlier than he would like, speak to people from whom he learns nothing, make
certain sacrifices.
His friends say: 'You're not free.'
The warrior is free. But he knows that an open oven bakes no bread.
55
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
To engage in any activity you need to know what you can expect, how to
achieve your objective, and whether or not you are capable of carrying out the
proposed task.
'Only a person who, suitably equipped, feels no desire for the results of
conquest and yet remains absorbed in the struggle can truly say that he has renounced
the fruits of victory.
One can renounce the fruit, but that renunciation does not signal indifference
to the results.'
The warrior of light listens with respect to Gandhi's strategy. And he remains
unconvinced by those who, incapable of achieving any result at all, preach
renunciation.
56
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light pays attention to small things because they can severely
hamper him.
A thorn, however tiny, can cause the traveller to halt. A tiny, invisible cell can
destroy a healthy organism. The memory of a past moment of fear allows cowardice
to be reborn with each new morning. A fraction of a second opens the way for the
enemy's fatal blow.
The warrior is attentive to small things. Sometimes he is hard on himself, but
he prefers to act in this way.
'The devil is in the detail,' says one of the Tradition's old proverbs.
57
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light does not always have faith.
There are moments when he believes in absolutely nothing. And he asks his
heart: 'Is all this effort really worth it?'
But his heart remains silent. And the warrior has to decide for himself.
Then he looks for an example. And he remembers that Jesus went through
something similar in order fully to inhabit the human condition.
'Remove this cup from me,' said Jesus. He too lost heart and courage, but he
did not stop.
The warrior of light continues despite his lack of faith. He goes forward and,
in the end, faith returns.
58
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior knows that no man is an island.
He cannot fight alone; whatever his plan, he depends on other people. He
needs to discuss his strategy, to ask for help, and - in moments of relaxation - to have
someone with whom he can sit by the fire, someone he can regale with tales of battle.
But he does not allow people to confuse this camaraderie with insecurity. He is
transparent in his actions and secretive in his plans.
A warrior of light dances with his companions, but does not place the
responsibility for his actions on anyone else.
59
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
In the intervals between battles, the warrior rests.
Often he spends whole days doing nothing, because that is what his heart
demands; but his intuition remains alert. He does not commit the capital sin of Sloth,
because he knows where that can lead - to the warm monotony of Sunday afternoons
when time simply passes.
The warrior calls this 'the peace of the cemetery'. He remembers a passage
from Revelation: 'I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot... So then
because thou art lukewarm and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my
mouth.'
A warrior rests and laughs. But he is always alert.
60
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light knows that everyone is afraid of everyone else.
This fear generally manifests itself in two ways: through aggression or through
submission. They are two facets of the same problem.
That is why, whenever he finds himself before someone who fills him with
fear, the warrior reminds himself that the other person has the same insecurities as he
has. He has surmounted similar obstacles and experienced the same problems.
But he knows how to deal with the situation better. Why? Because he uses fear
as an engine, not as a brake.
The warrior learns from his opponent and acts in a like manner.
61
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
For the warrior there is no such thing as an impossible love.
He is not intimidated by silence, indifference or rejection. He knows that,
behind the mask of ice that people wear, there beats a heart of fire.
This is why the warrior takes more risks than other people. He is constantly
seeking the love of someone, even if that means often having to hear the word 'No',
returning home defeated and feeling rejected in body and soul.
A warrior never gives in to fear when he is searching for what he needs.
Without love, he is nothing.
62
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light recognises the silence that precedes an important battle.
And that silence seems to be saying: 'Things have stopped. Why not forget
about fighting and enjoy yourself a little.' Inexperienced combatants lay down their
arms at this point and complain that they are bored.
The warrior listens intently to that silence; somewhere something is
happening. He knows that devastating earthquakes arrive without warning. He has
walked through forests at night and knows that it is precisely when the animals are
silent that danger is near.
While the others talk, the warrior trains himself in the use of the sword and
keeps his eye on the horizon.
63
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light is a believer.
Because he believes in miracles, miracles begin to happen. Because he is sure
that his thoughts can change his life, his life begins to change. Because he is certain
that he will find love, that love appears.
Now and then, he is disappointed. Sometimes, he gets hurt.
Then he hears people say: 'He's so ingenuous!'
But the warrior knows that it is worth it. For every defeat, he has two victories
in his favour.
All believers know this.
64
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light has learned that it is best to follow the light.
He has behaved treacherously, he has lied, he has strayed from the path, he has
courted darkness. And everything was fine, as if nothing had happened.
Then an abyss suddenly opens up; you can take a thousand steps in safety, but
just one step too many can put an end to everything. Then the warrior stops before he
destroys himself.
When he makes that decision, he hears four comments: 'You always do the
wrong thing. You're too old to change. You're no good. You don't deserve it.'
He looks up at the sky. And a voice says: 'My dear, everyone makes mistakes.
You're forgiven, but I cannot force that forgiveness on you. It's your choice.'
The true warrior of light accepts that forgiveness.
65
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light is always trying to improve.
Every blow of his sword carries with it centuries of wisdom and meditation.
Every blow needs to have the strength and skill of all the warriors of the past who,
even today, continue to bless the struggle. Each movement during combat honours the
movements that the previous generations tried to transmit through the Tradition.
The warrior develops the beauty of his blows.
66
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light is reliable.
He makes a few mistakes, he sometimes thinks he is more important than he
really is, but he does not lie.
When people gather round the fire, he talks to his friends, male and female. He
knows that his words are stored in the memory of the Universe, like a testimony of
what he thinks.
And the warrior asks himself: 'Why do I talk so much, when often I am
incapable of carrying out everything I say?'
His heart replies: 'When you defend your ideas in public, you then have to
make an effort to live accordingly.'
It is because he believes that he is what he says he is that the warrior ends up
becoming precisely that.
67
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior knows that there are occasional pauses in the struggle.
There is no point in forcing things; he must have patience and wait for the two
sides to clash again. In the silence of the battlefield, he listens to his heart beating.
He notices that he is tense, that he is afraid.
The warrior takes stock of his life; he makes sure that his sword is sharp, his
heart satisfied, that faith still burns in his soul. He knows that maintenance is as
important as action.
There is always something not quite right. And the warrior takes advantage of
those moments when time stops to equip himself better.
68
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior knows that an angel and a devil are both competing for his sword
hand.
The devil says: 'You will weaken. You will not know exactly when. You are
afraid.' The angel says: 'You will weaken. You will not know exactly when. You are
afraid.'
The warrior is surprised. Both angel and devil have said the same thing.
Then the devil goes on: 'Let me help you.' And the angel says: 'I will help you.'
At that moment, the warrior understands the difference. The words may be the
same, but these two allies are completely different.
And he chooses the angel's hand.
69
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
Whenever the warrior draws his sword, he uses it.
It can be used to clear a path, to help someone, to fend off danger, but a sword
is a capricious thing and does not like to see its blade exposed for no good reason.
That is why the warrior never makes threats. He can attack, defend himself or
flee; all of these attitudes form part of combat. It is not, however, part of combat to
diminish the force of a blow by talking about it.
A warrior of light is always alert to the movements of his sword. But he never
forgets that the sword is watching his every move as well.
It was not made to be used by the mouth.
70
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
Sometimes evil pursues the warrior of light, and when it does, he calmly
invites it into his tent.
He asks evil: 'Do you want to hurt me or to use me to hurt others?'
Evil pretends not to hear. It says that it knows the darkness in the warrior's
soul. It touches wounds that have not yet healed and calls for vengeance. It mentions
certain tricks and subtle poisons that will help him to destroy his enemies.
The warrior of light listens. If conversation flags, he encourages evil to
continue talking by asking all about its various plans.
When he has heard everything, he gets up and leaves. Evil feels so weary and
empty after all this talk that it does not have the strength to follow him.
71
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light unwittingly takes a false step and plunges into the abyss.
Ghosts frighten him and solitude torments him. His aim had been to fight the
Good Fight, and he had never imagined that this would happen to him, but it did.
Shrouded in darkness, he makes contact with his master.
'Master, I have fallen into the abyss,' he says. 'The waters are deep and dark.'
'Remember one thing,' replies his master. 'You do not drown simply by
plunging into water, you only drown if you stay beneath the surface.'
And the warrior uses all his strength to escape from his predicament.
72
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light behaves like a child.
People are shocked; they have forgotten that a child needs to have fun and to
play, to be slightly irreverent and to ask awkward, childish questions, to talk nonsense
that not even he believes in.
And they say, horrified: 'So this is the spiritual path, is it? He's so immature!'
The warrior feels proud of such comments. And he remains in touch with God
through his innocence and his joy, without ever losing sight of his mission.
73
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The Latin root of the word 'responsibility' reveals its true meaning: the
capacity to respond, to react.
A responsible warrior is one who has proved able to observe and to learn. He
is even capable of being 'irresponsible'. Sometimes, he has allowed himself to be
carried along by a situation, without responding or reacting.
But he always learned his lesson; he took a stance, listened to advice and was
humble enough to accept help.
A responsible warrior is not someone who takes the weight of the world on his
shoulders, but someone who has learned to deal with the challenges of the moment.
74
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light cannot always choose his battlefield.
Sometimes he is taken by surprise in the middle of battles not of his choosing,
but there is no point in running away, those battles will merely follow him.
Then, at the point when conflict seems almost inevitable, the warrior talks to
his opponent. Showing neither fear nor cowardice, he tries to find out why the other
man wants to fight, what made him leave his village in order to seek him out to fight
this duel. Without even unsheathing his sword, the warrior persuades his opponent
that this is not a fight for him.
A warrior of light listens to what his opponent has to say. He only fights if
absolutely necessary.
75
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light is terrified when it comes to making important decisions.
'This is too much for you,' says a friend. 'Go on, be brave,' says another. And
so his doubts grow.
After some days of anxiety, he withdraws to the corner of his tent where he
usually sits to meditate and pray. He sees himself in the future. He sees the people
who will benefit or be harmed by his attitude. He does not want to cause pointless
suffering, but nor does he want to abandon the path.
The warrior allows the decision to reveal itself.
If he has to say 'yes', he will say it bravely. If he has to say 'no', he will say it
without a trace of cowardice.
76
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light accepts his Personal Legend completely.
His companions say: 'He has remarkable faith!'
For a moment, the warrior feels proud, then immediately feels ashamed of
what he has heard because he does not have as much faith as he appears to have.
At that moment, his angel whispers: 'You are only an instrument of the light.
There is no reason to feel proud or to feel guilty, there are only reasons to feel happy.'
And the warrior of light, aware now that he is but an instrument, feels calmer
and more secure.
77
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
'Hitler may have lost the war on the battlefield, but he ended up winning
something too,' says M. Halter, 'because man in the twentieth century created the
concentration camp and revived torture and taught his fellow men that it is possible to
close their eyes to the misfortunes of others.'
Perhaps he is right: there are abandoned children, massacred civilians,
innocent people imprisoned, lonely old people, drunks in the gutter, madmen in
power.
But perhaps he isn't right at all, for there are also warriors of light.
And warriors of light never accept what is unacceptable.
78
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light never forgets the old saying: the good little goat doesn't
bleat.
Injustices happen. Everyone finds themselves in situations they do not
deserve, usually when they are unable to defend themselves. Defeat often knocks at
the warrior's door.
At such times, he remains silent. He does not waste energy on words, because
they can do nothing; it is best to use his strength to resist and have patience, knowing
that Someone is watching, Someone who saw the unnecessary suffering and who will
not accept it.
That Someone gives him what he most needs: time. Sooner or later, everything
will once more work in his favour.
A warrior of light is wise; he does not talk about his defeats.
79
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A sword may not last very long, but the warrior of light must.
That is why he never allows himself to be deceived by his own abilities and
thus avoids being taken by surprise. He gives each thing the value it deserves.
Often, when the warrior is pondering grave matters, the devil whispers in his
ear: 'Don't worry about that, it's not important.'
At others, when he is faced by banalities, the devil says to him: 'You should
pour all your energies into resolving this situation.'
The warrior does not listen to what the devil is telling him; he is the master of
his sword.
80
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light is always vigilant.
He does not ask anyone else for permission to wield his sword; he simply
takes it in his hands. Nor does he waste time explaining his actions; faithful to God's
decisions, he gives his answer in what he does.
He looks to either side of him and identifies his friends. He looks behind him
and identifies his opponents. He is implacable with treachery, but he does not seek
revenge; he merely drives away the enemies of his life, never fighting with them any
longer than is necessary.
A warrior does not try to seem, he is.
81
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior does not keep company with those who wish to harm him. Nor is he
seen in the company of those who want to 'console' him.
He avoids anyone who is only by his side in the event of a defeat: these false
friends want to prove that weakness is rewarded. They always bring him bad news.
They always try to destroy the warrior's confidence, all under the cloak of 'solidarity'.
When they see him wounded, they dissolve in tears, but, in their heart of
hearts, they are happy because the warrior has lost a battle. They do not understand
that this is part of the fight.
The true companions of a warrior are beside him always, during the difficult
times and the easy times.
82
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
At the beginning of his struggle, the warrior of light stated: 'I have dreams.'
After some years, he realises that it is actually possible to reach his goal; he
knows that he will be rewarded.
At that moment, he feels sad. He knows about other people's unhappiness,
about the loneliness and frustration experienced by a large section of humanity, and he
does not believe that he deserves what he is about to receive.
His angel whispers: 'Give it all up.' The warrior kneels down and offers God
his conquests.
That act of surrender forces the warrior to stop asking foolish questions and
helps him to overcome his feelings of guilt.
83
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light has the sword in his hands.
He is the one who decides what he will do and what he will never do.
There are moments when life leads him into a crisis; he is separated from
things he has always loved; it is then that the warrior reflects. He checks that he is
fulfilling God's will or if he is merely acting selfishly. If this separation is really part
of his path, then he accepts without complaint.
If, however, such a separation was provoked by someone else's perverse
actions, then he is implacable in his response.
The warrior possesses both force and forgiveness. He can use both with equal
skill.
84
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light never falls into the trap of that word 'freedom'.
When his people are oppressed, freedom is a very clear concept. At such
times, using sword and shield, he fights as long as he has breath and life. When
contrasted with oppression, freedom is easy to understand: it is the opposite of
slavery.
But sometimes the warrior hears older people saying: 'When I stop working, I
will be free.' A year later, those same people are complaining: 'Life is all boring
routine.' In this case, freedom is difficult to understand: it means absence of meaning.
A warrior of light is always committed. He is the slave of his dream and free
to act.
85
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light is not constantly repeating the same struggle, especially
when there are neither advances nor retreats.
If a battle is not progressing, he knows that he must sit down with the enemy
and negotiate a truce; they have both practised the art of the sword, now they need to
understand each other.
This is a dignified gesture, not a cowardly one. It is a balance of forces and a
change of strategy.
Once the peace plans have been drawn up, the warriors return to their houses.
They do not need to prove anything to anyone; they fought the Good Fight and kept
the faith. Each one gave a little, thus learning the art of negotiation.
86
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The friends of the warrior of light ask him where he draws his energy from.
He says: 'From the hidden enemy.'
His friends ask who that is.
The warrior responds: 'Someone we can no longer hurt.'
It might be a boy who beat him in a childhood scrap, the girlfriend who left
him when he was eleven, the teacher who said he was stupid. When he is tired, the
warrior reminds himself that these enemies have still not seen his courage.
He does not consider revenge, because the hidden enemy is no longer part of
his story. He thinks only of improving his skills so that his deeds will be known
throughout the world and reach the ears of those who have hurt him in the past.
Yesterday's pain is the warrior of light's strength.
87
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light always has a second chance in life.
Like all other men and woman, he was not born knowing how to use a sword;
he made many mistakes before he discovered his Personal Legend.
No warrior can sit down by the fire and tell the others: 'I always did the right
thing.' Anyone who says this is lying and has not yet learned to know himself. The
true warrior of light has committed injustices in the past.
But as he proceeds on his journey, he realises that the people with whom he
did not behave correctly always cross his path again.
It is his chance to right the wrong he did them, and he always, unhesitatingly,
seizes that chance.
88
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior is as wise as a serpent and as innocent as a dove.
When people gather to talk, he does not judge the behaviour of others; he
knows that darkness uses an invisible net to spread its evil. This net catches any
snippet of information floating in the air and transforms it into the intrigue and envy
that infest the human soul.
Thus, everything that is said about someone always reaches the ears of the
enemies of that person, augmented by the dark weight of poison and malice.
For this reason, when the warrior speaks of his brother's opinions, he imagines
that his brother is there present, listening to what he is saying.
89
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The Breviary of Medieval Knights says:
'The spiritual energy of the Path uses justice and patience to prepare your
spirit.
This is the Path of the Knight: a path that is at once easy and difficult, because
it forces one to set aside trivial things and chance friendships. That is why, at first,
many hesitate to follow it.
This is the first teaching of the Knights: you will erase everything you had
written in the book of your life up until now: restlessness, uncertainty, lies. And in the
place of all this you will write the word courage. By beginning the journey with that
word and continuing with faith in God, you will arrive wherever you need to arrive.'
90
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
When the moment for combat approaches, the warrior of light is prepared for
all eventualities.
He analyses every strategy and asks: 'What would I do if I had to fight
myself?' He thus discovers his weak points.
At that moment, his opponent approaches; he comes with a bag full of
promises, treaties, negotiations. He has tempting proposals and easy alternatives.
The warrior analyses each of the proposals; he also seeks agreement, but
without ever losing his dignity. If he avoids combat, it will not be because he was
seduced, but because he judged it to be the best strategy.
A warrior of light does not accept gifts from his enemy.
91
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
I repeat:
You can recognise a warrior of light by the look in his eye. Warriors of light
are in the world, they form part of the world, and they were sent into the world
without saddlebags or sandals. They are often cowardly. They do not always act
correctly.
Warriors of light are wounded by the most foolish things, they worry about
trivialities, they believe themselves incapable of growing. Warriors of light sometimes
believe themselves unworthy of any blessing or miracle.
Warriors of light often ask themselves what they are doing here. Often they
find their lives meaningless.
That is why they are warriors of light. Because they fail. Because they ask
questions. Because they keep looking for a meaning. And, in the end, they will find it.
92
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light is now waking from his dream.
He thinks: 'I do not know how to deal with this light that is making me grow.'
The light, however, does not disappear.
The warrior thinks: 'Changes must be made that I do not feel like making.'
The light remains, because 'feel' is a word full of traps.
Then the eyes and heart of the warrior begin to grow accustomed to the light.
It no longer frightens him and he finally accepts his own Legend, even if this means
running risks.
The warrior has been asleep for a long time. It is only natural that he should
wake up very gradually.
93
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The experienced fighter puts up with insults; he knows the strength of his fist
and the skill of his blows. Confronted by an unprepared opponent, he looks deep into
his eyes and conquers him without ever having to resort to a physical fight.
As the warrior learns from his spiritual master, the light of faith shines in his
eyes and he does not need to prove anything to anyone. He is not bothered by his
opponent's aggressive arguments which say that God is a superstition, that miracles
are just tricks, that believing in angels is running away from reality.
Like the fighter, the warrior of light is aware of his own immense strength; he
never fights with anyone who does not deserve the honour of combat.
94
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light must always remember the five rules of combat, set down
by Chuan Tzu three thousand years ago:
Faith Before going into battle, you must believe in the reasons for the fight.
Companions Choose your allies and learn to fight in company, for no one
ever won a war single-handed.
Time A battle in winter is different from a battle in summer; a good warrior
is careful to select the right moment to begin a fight.
Space One does not fight in the same way in a mountain pass as one would
on a plain. Think about your surroundings and how best to move around in them.
Strategy The best warrior is the one who plans his fight.
95
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior rarely knows the result of a battle when the battle is over.
The activity of fighting will have generated an enormous amount of energy
around him and there is always a moment when victory and defeat are both equally
possible. Time will tell who won and who lost, but he knows that, from that moment
on, he can do nothing more: the fate of that battle lies in God's hands.
At such moments, the warrior of light is not concerned with results. He
examines his heart and asks: Did I fight the Good Fight?' If the answer is 'yes', he can
rest. If the answer is 'no', he takes up his sword and begins training all over again.
96
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
Each warrior of light contains within him the spark of God.
His destiny is to be with other warriors, but sometimes he will need to practise
the art of the sword alone; this is why, when he is apart from his companions, he
behaves like a star.
He lights up his allotted part of the Universe and tries to point out galaxies and
worlds to all those who gaze up at the sky.
The warrior's persistence will soon be rewarded. Gradually, other warriors
approach, and they join together to form constellations, each with their own symbols
and mysteries.
97
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
Sometimes the warrior feels as if he were living two lives at once.
In one of them he is obliged to do all the things he does not want to do and to
fight for ideas in which he does not believe. But there is another life, and he discovers
it in his dreams, in his reading and in his encounters with people who share his ideas.
The warrior allows his two lives to draw near. 'There is a bridge that links
what I do with what I would like to do,' he thinks. Slowly, his dreams take over his
everyday life, and then he realises that he is ready for the thing he always wanted.
Then all that is needed is a little daring, and his two lives become one.
98
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
Write down again what I told you:
The warrior of light needs time to himself. And he uses that time for rest,
contemplation and contact with the Soul of the World. Even in the midst of a battle,
he manages to meditate.
Occasionally, the warrior sits down, relaxes and lets everything that is
happening around him continue to happen. He looks at the world as if he were a
spectator, he does not try to add to it or take away from it, he merely surrenders
unresistingly to the movement of life.
Little by little, everything that seemed complicated begins to become simple.
And the warrior is glad.
99
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light is wary of people who think they know the path.
They are always so confident of their own ability to make decisions that they
do not notice the irony with which destiny writes each life, and they always complain
when the inevitable knocks at the door.
The warrior of light has dreams. His dreams carry him forward. But he never
makes the mistake of thinking that the way is broad and the gate is wide. He knows
that the Universe functions in the same way as alchemy: solve et coagula said the
masters: 'Concentrate and disperse your energies according to the situation.'
There are moments when one should act and moments when one should
accept. The warrior knows how to distinguish between these moments.
100
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light, once he has learned how to use a sword, discovers that
his equipment is still incomplete - he needs armour.
He sets off in search of this armour and he listens to the advice of various
salesmen.
'Use the breastplate of solitude,' says one.
'Use the shield of cynicism', says another.
'The best armour is not to get involved in anything,' says a third.
The warrior, however, ignores them. He calmly goes to his sacred place and
puts on the indestructible cloak of faith.
Faith parries all blows. Faith transforms poison into crystalline water.
101
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
'I always believe everything anyone tells me and I'm always disappointed,' his
companions say.
It is important to trust people; a warrior of light is not afraid of
disappointments because he knows the power of his sword and the strength of his
love.
However, he imposes certain limits: it is one thing to accept God's signs and to
know that the angels use the mouths of other people to give us advice. It is quite
another to be incapable of making decisions and to be always looking for ways of
letting others tell us what we should do.
A warrior trusts other people because, first and foremost, he trusts himself.
102
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light views life with tenderness and determination.
He stands before a mystery, whose solution he will one day find. Every so
often, he says to himself: 'This life is absolutely insane.'
He is right. In surrendering to the miracle of the everyday, he notices that he
cannot always foresee the consequences of his actions. Sometimes he acts without
even knowing that he is doing so, he saves someone without even knowing he is
saving them, he suffers without even knowing why he is sad.
Yes, life is insane. But the great wisdom of the warrior lies in choosing his
insanity wisely.
103
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light studies the two columns on either side of the door he is
trying to open.
One is called Fear and the other is called Desire. The warrior looks at the
column of Fear and on it is written: 'You are entering a dangerous, unfamiliar world
where everything you have learned up until now will prove useless.'
The warrior looks at the column of Desire and on it is written: 'You are about
to leave a familiar world wherein are stored all the things you ever wanted and for
which you struggled long and hard.'
The warrior smiles because nothing frightens him and nothing holds him. With
the confidence of one who knows what he wants, he opens the door.
104
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light practises a powerful exercise for inner growth: he pays
attention to the things he does automatically, such as breathing, blinking, or noticing
the things around him.
He does this when he feels confused, and in this way he frees himself from
tensions and allows his intuition to work more freely, without interference from his
fears and desires. Certain problems that appeared to be insoluble are resolved, certain
sorrows from which he thought he would never recover vanish naturally.
He uses this technique whenever he is faced with a difficult situation.
105
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light hears comments like: 'There are certain things I'd rather
not talk about because people are so envious.'
When he hears this, the warrior laughs. Envy cannot harm you, if you don't let
it. Envy is part of life and everyone should learn to deal with it.
However, he rarely discusses his plans. And sometimes people believe this is
because he is afraid of envy.
But he knows that whenever he talks about a dream, he uses a little bit of the
energy from that dream in order to do so. And by talking, he runs the risk of spending
all the energy he needs to put the dream into action.
A warrior of light knows the power of words.
106
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light knows the value of persistence and of courage.
Often, during combat, he receives blows that he was not expecting. And he
realises that, during the war, his enemy is bound to win some of the battles. When this
happens, he weeps bitter tears and rests in order to recover his energies a little. But he
immediately resumes his battle for his dreams.
The longer he remains away, the more likely he is to feel weak, fearful and
intimidated. When a horseman falls off his horse, if he does not remount immediately,
he will never have the courage to do so again.
107
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior knows when a battle is worth fighting.
He bases his decisions on inspiration and faith. He nevertheless meets people
who ask him to fight battles that are not his own, on battlefields that he does not know
or which do not interest him. They want to involve the warrior of light in contests that
are important to them, but not to him.
Often these are people close to the warrior of light, people who love him and
trust in his strength and who want him in some way to ease their anxieties.
At such moments, he smiles and makes it clear to them that he loves them, but
he does not take up the challenge.
A true warrior of light always chooses his own battlefield.
108
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light knows how to lose.
He does not treat defeat as if it were a matter of indifference to him, saying
things like 'Oh, it doesn't matter' or 'To be honest, I didn't really want it that much', He
accepts defeat as defeat and does not try to make a victory out of it.
Painful wounds, the indifference of friends, the loneliness of losing - all leave
a bitter taste. But at these times, he says to himself: 'I fought for something and did
not succeed. I lost the first battle.'
These words give him renewed strength. He knows that no one wins all the
time and he knows how to distinguish his successes from his failures.
109
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
When somebody wants something, the whole Universe conspires in their
favour. The warrior of light knows this.
For this reason, he takes great care with his thoughts. Hidden beneath a whole
series of good intentions lie feelings that no one dares confess to himself: vengeance,
self-destruction, guilt, fear of winning, a macabre joy at other people's tragedies.
The Universe does not judge; it conspires in favour of what we want. That is
why the warrior has the courage to look into the dark places of his soul in order to
ensure that he is not asking for the wrong things.
And he is always very careful about what he thinks.
110
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
Jesus said: 'Let your word be "Yes, yes" or "No, no".' When the warrior takes
on a commitment, he keeps his word.
Those who make promises they do not keep lose their self-respect and feel
ashamed of their actions. These people spend their lives in constant flight; they
expend far more energy on coming up with a whole series of excuses to unsay what
they said than the warrior of light does in honouring his commitments.
Sometimes he too takes on some foolish commitment which will in some way
harm him. He does not repeat this mistake, but he nevertheless keeps his word and
pays the price for his own impulsiveness.
111
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
When he wins a battle, the warrior celebrates.
This victory has cost him anxious moments, nights racked with doubt, endless
days of waiting. Since ancient times, celebrating a triumph has been part of the ritual
of life itself: celebration is a rite of passage.
His companions see the warrior of light's joy and think: 'Why is he doing that?
He might be disappointed in his next battle. He might draw down on himself the
wrath of his enemy.'
But the warrior knows why he is celebrating. He is savouring the best gift that
victory can bring: confidence.
He celebrates yesterday's victory in order to gain more strength for tomorrow's
battle.
112
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
One day, for no apparent reason, the warrior realises that he does not feel the
same enthusiasm for the fight that he used to.
He continues to do what he has always done, but every gesture seems
meaningless. At such a time, he has only one choice: to continue fighting the Good
Fight. He says his prayers out of duty or fear or whatever, but he does not abandon the
path.
He knows that the angel of the One who inspires him has simply wandered off
somewhere. The warrior keeps his attention focused on the battle and he perseveres,
even when everything seems utterly pointless. The angel will soon return and the
merest flutter of his wings will restore the warrior's joy to him.
113
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light shares with others what he knows of the path.
Anyone who gives help also receives help and needs to teach what he has
learned. That is why he sits by the fire and recounts his day on the battlefield.
A friend whispers: 'Why talk so openly about your strategy? Don't you realise
that, by doing so, you run the risk of sharing your conquests with others?'
The warrior merely smiles and says nothing. He knows that if, at the end of his
journey, he arrives to find an empty paradise, his struggle will have been a waste of
time.
114
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light has learned that God uses solitude to teach us how to live
with other people.
He uses rage to show us the infinite value of peace. He uses boredom to
underline the importance of adventure and spontaneity.
God uses silence to teach us to use words responsibly. He uses tiredness so
that we can understand the value of waking up. He uses illness to underline the
blessing of good health.
God uses fire to teach us about water. He uses earth so that we can understand
the value of air. He uses death to show us the importance of life.
115
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light gives before he is asked.
Seeing this, some of his companions say: 'If someone wants something, they'll
ask for it.'
But the warrior knows that there are many people who simply cannot bring
themselves to ask for help. Alongside him live people with such fragile hearts that
love becomes a sickness; they are starving for affection and yet are ashamed to show
it.
The warrior gathers such people round the fire, he tells stories, shares his food,
gets drunk with them. The following day, everyone feels better.
Those who look on other people's misery with indifference are the most
miserable of all.
116
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
If the strings of an instrument are always taut, they go out of tune.
Warriors who spend all their time training lose their spontaneity in battle.
Horses that are always jumping fences end up breaking a leg. Bows that are bent all
day no longer shoot arrows with the same force.
That is why, even if he is not in the mood, the warrior of light tries to enjoy the
small everyday things of life.
117
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light listens to Lao Tzu when he says that we should let go of
the idea of days and hours in order to pay more attention to the moment.
Only in this way can he resolve certain problems before they occur; by
focusing on the small things, he manages to avoid larger calamities.
But thinking about the small things is not the same as thinking small. Overanxiety
ultimately banishes every trace of joy from life.
The warrior knows that a great dream is made up of many different things, just
as the light from the sun is the sum of its millions of rays.
118
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
There are times when the warrior's path becomes merely routine.
Then he applies the teaching of Rabbi Nachman of Breslov: If you cannot
meditate, you should repeat one simple word, because this is good for the soul. Do not
say anything else, just repeat that word over and over, innumerable times. Finally, it
will lose all meaning, but take on an entirely new significance. God will open the
doors and you will find yourself using that simple word to say everything that you
wanted to say.'
When he is forced to perform the same task several times, the warrior uses this
tactic and transforms work into prayer.
119
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior of light has no 'certainties', he just has a path to follow, a path to
which he tries to adapt depending on the season.
During battles that take place in summer he does not use the same equipment
and techniques that he would use during battles that take place in winter. By being
flexible, he no longer judges the world on the basis of 'right' and 'wrong', but on the
basis of 'the most appropriate attitude for that particular moment'.
He knows that his companions also have to adapt and is not surprised when
they change their attitude. He gives each one the necessary time to justify his actions.
But when it comes to treachery, he is implacable.
120
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior sits around the fire with his friends.
They spend hours criticising each other, but they end the night sleeping in the
same tent, having forgotten all the insults that were bandied about. Occasionally, a
new member joins the group. Because he does not yet share a common history, he
shows only his good qualities, and some see in him a master.
But the warrior of light never compares him with his old companions in battle.
He makes the stranger welcome, but he will not trust him until he knows his defects
too.
A warrior of light does not go into battle without knowing the limitations of
his ally.
121
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior knows an old saying: 'If regrets could kill…'
And he knows that regrets can kill; they slowly eat away at the soul of
someone who has done something wrong and they lead eventually to self-destruction.
The warrior does not want to die like that. When he acts perversely or
maliciously - because he is a man of many faults - he is never too ashamed to ask
forgiveness.
If possible, he does his best to repair the wrong he has done. If the injured
party is dead, then he does some good turn to a stranger and offers up that task to the
soul that he wounded.
A warrior of light has no regrets, because regrets can kill. He humbles himself
and undoes the wrong he has done.
122
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
All warriors of light have heard their mothers say: 'My son wasn't thinking
straight when he did that; deep down, he's a very good person.'
Although he respects his mother, he knows that this is not true. He does not
waste his time blaming himself for his rash actions nor does his spend his life
forgiving himself for all the wrong he has done - doing that would never set him back
on the right path.
He uses common sense to judge not the intentions of an action but its
consequences. He takes responsibility for everything he does, even if he has to pay a
high price for his mistake.
As the old Arabic proverb says: 'God judges a tree by its fruits and not by its
roots.'
123
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
Before making any important decision - declaring a war, moving with his
companions to another plain, choosing a field in which to sow seed - the warrior asks
himself: 'How will this affect the fifth generation of my descendants?'
A warrior knows that everything a person does has enduring consequences and
he needs to understand what kind of world he is leaving behind for that fifth
generation.
124
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
'It's just a storm in a tea cup,' someone says to the warrior of light.
But he never exaggerates his difficulties and always tries to remain calm.
And he never judges someone else's suffering.
A small detail - which does not affect him in the least - could serve to ignite
the storm brewing in his brother's soul. The warrior respects the suffering of others
and does not try to compare it with his own.
The cup of suffering is not the same size for everyone.
125
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
'The most important quality on the spiritual path is courage,' said Gandhi.
The world seems threatening and dangerous to cowards. They seek the false
security of a life with no major challenges and arm themselves to the teeth in order to
defend what they think they possess. Cowards end up making the bars of their own
prison.
The warrior of light projects his thoughts beyond the horizon. He knows that if
he does not do anything for the world, no one else will.
So he fights the Good Fight and he helps others, even though he does not quite
understand why.
126
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light pays close attention to a text that the Soul of the World
transmitted to Chico Xavier:
'When you have managed to overcome grave problems in a relationship, do
not spend time remembering the difficult times, concentrate on the joy of having
passed yet another of life's tests. When you emerge from a long period of medical
treatment, do not brood on the suffering you endured, think instead of God's blessing
that allowed you to be cured.
Carry in your memory, for the rest of your life, the good things that came out
of those difficulties. They will serve as a proof of your abilities and will give you
confidence when you are faced by other obstacles.'
127
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior of light concentrates on the small miracles of daily life.
He is capable of seeing what is beautiful because he carries beauty within
himself, for the world is a mirror and gives back to each man the reflection of his own
face. The warrior knows his faults and limitations, but he does all he can to maintain
his good humour in moments of crisis.
The world is, after all, doing its best to help him, even though everything
around him seems to be saying the opposite.
128
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
There is such a thing as emotional rubbish; it is produced in the factories of
the mind. It consists of pain that has long since passed and is no longer useful. It
consists of precautions that were important in the past, but serve no purpose in the
present.
The warrior has memories too, but he learns how to separate the useful from
the unnecessary; he disposes of his emotional rubbish.
A companion says: 'But that's part of my history. Why should I jettison
feelings that marked my very existence?'
The warrior smiles, but he does not try to feel things that he no longer feels.
He is changing and he wants his feelings to keep pace with him.
129
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
When the master sees that the warrior is depressed, he says:
'You are not what you seem to be in these moments of sadness. You are better
than that.
Many have left - for reasons we will never understand - but you are still here.
Why did God carry off all those amazing people and leave you?
By now, millions of people will have given up. They don't get angry, they
don't weep, they don't do anything; they merely wait for time to pass. They have lost
the ability to react.
You, however, are sad. That proves that your soul is still alive.'
130
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
Sometimes, in the middle of an apparently endless battle, the warrior has an
idea and he manages to triumph in a matter of seconds.
Then he thinks: 'Why did I labour for so long over a battle that could have
been resolved with only half the energy I spent on it?'
The truth is that all problems seem very simple once they have been resolved.
The great victory, which appears so simple today, was the result of a series of small
victories that went unnoticed.
Then the warrior understands what happened and he sleeps easy. Far from
blaming himself for having taken so long to arrive, he is simply glad to know that he
did arrive in the end.
131
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
There are two types of prayer.
In the first type, the person asks for certain things to happen and attempts to
tell God what he should do. This does not allow the Creator either time or space in
which to act. God - who knows perfectly well what is best for each of us - will
continue to do as he sees fit. And the person praying is left with the impression that
his prayer went unanswered.
In the second type, the person may not understand the Almighty's intentions,
but he allows his life to develop according to his Creator's plans. He asks to be spared
suffering, he asks for joy in the Good Fight, but he never forgets to add: 'Thy will be
done'.
This is how the warrior of light chooses to pray.
132
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior knows that the most important words in all languages are the
small words.
Yes. Love. God.
They are words that are easy enough to say and which fill vast empty spaces.
There is, however, one word - another small word - that many people have
great difficulty in saying: no.
Someone who never says no, thinks of himself as generous, understanding,
polite, because 'no' is thought of as being nasty, selfish, unspiritual.
The warrior does not fall into this trap. There are times when, in saying 'yes' to
others, he is actually saying 'no' to himself.
That is why he never says 'yes' with his lips if, in his heart, he is saying 'no'.
133
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
First: God is sacrifice. Suffer in this life and you will be happy in the next.
Second: People who have fun are childish. Remain tense at all times.
Third: Other people know what is best for us because they have more
experience.
Fourth: Our duty is to make other people happy. We must please them even if
that means making major sacrifices.
Fifth: We must not drink from the cup of happiness; we might get to like it and
we won't always have it in our hands.
Sixth: We must accept all punishments. We are guilty.
Seventh: Fear is a warning. We don't want to take any risks.
These are the commandments that no warrior of light can obey.
134
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A very large group of people is standing in the middle of the road, barring the
way into Paradise.
The puritan asks: 'What are these sinners doing here?'
And the moralist bawls: 'The prostitute wants to join the feast!'
The guardian of social values yells: 'How can the adulteress be forgiven when
she has sinned?'
The penitent rends his clothes: 'Why cure a blind man if all he cares about is
his illness and when he doesn't even say thank you?'
The ascetic protests: 'You let that woman pour expensive oil on your hair!
Why didn't she sell it instead to buy food?'
Smiling, Jesus holds the door open. And the warriors of light go in, despite the
hysterical shouting.
135
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The opponent is wise.
Whenever he can, he makes use of the easiest and most effective of his
weapons: gossip. It doesn't take much effort to use it because others do the work for
him. A few misdirected words can destroy months of dedication, years spent in search
of harmony.
The warrior of light is often the victim of this trick. He does not know where
the blow came from and cannot prove that the gossip is false. Gossip does not allow
him the right to defend himself: it condemns without a trial.
When this happens, he puts up with the consequences and the undeserved
punishment, for, as he well knows, words are powerful. But he suffers in silence and
never uses the same weapon to hit back at his opponent.
The warrior of light is not a coward.
136
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
'You can give a fool a thousand intellects, but the only one he will want is
yours,' says an Arabic proverb. When the warrior of light starts planting his garden, he
notices that his neighbour is there, spying. He likes to give advice on when to sow
actions, when to fertilise thoughts and water conquests.
If he listens to what his neighbour is saying, he will end up creating something
that is not his; the garden he is tending will be his neighbour's idea.
But a true warrior of light knows that every garden has its own mysteries,
which only the patient hand of the gardener can unravel. That is why he prefers to
concentrate on the sun, the rain and the seasons.
He knows that the fool who gives advice about someone else's garden is not
tending his own plants.
137
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
In order to fight, you must keep your eyes open and have faithful companions
by your side.
It can happen that someone who was fighting alongside the warrior of light
suddenly becomes his opponent instead.
The warrior's first reaction is hatred, but he knows that a blind combatant is
lost in the midst of battle.
And so he tries to see the good things that his former ally did during the time
in which they lived side by side; he tries to understand what led to that sudden change
of attitude, what wounds he had accumulated in his soul. He tries to discover what
made one of them abandon their dialogue.
No one is entirely good or evil; that is what the warrior thinks when he sees
that he has a new opponent.
138
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
A warrior knows that the ends do not justify the means.
Because there are no ends, there are only means. Life carries him from
unknown to unknown. Each moment is filled with this thrilling mystery: the warrior
does not know where he came from nor where he is going.
But he is not here by chance. And he is overjoyed by surprises and excited by
landscapes that he has never seen before. He often feels afraid, but that is normal in a
warrior.
If he thinks only of the goal, he will not be able to pay attention to the signs
along the way. If he concentrates only on one question, he will miss various answers
that are there beside him.
That is why the warrior submits.
139
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
The warrior knows about the 'waterfall effect'.
He has often seen someone mistreating another person who lacks the courage
to respond. Then, out of cowardice and resentment, that person vents his anger on
someone weaker than himself, who takes it out on someone else, in a veritable torrent
of misery. No one knows the consequences of his own cruelty.
That is why the warrior is careful in his use of the sword and only accepts an
opponent who is worthy of him. In moments of rage, he punches a rock and bruises
his hand.
The hand will heal eventually, but the child who got beaten because his father
lost a battle will bear the marks for the rest of his life.
140
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
When the order to move on comes, the warrior looks at all the friends he has
made during the time that he followed the path. He taught some to hear the bells of a
drowned temple, he told others stories around the fire.
His heart is sad, but he knows that his sword is sacred and that he must obey
the orders of the One to whom he offered up his struggle.
Then the warrior thanks his travelling companions, takes a deep breath and
continues on, laden with memories of an unforgettable journey.
141
Oh Maria concebida sem pecado, rogai por nós que recorremos à Vós. Amém
Epilogue
It was dark by the time she finished speaking. The two of them sat watching
the moon rising.
'Many of the things you told me contradict each other,' he said.
She got up.
'Goodbye,' she said. 'You knew that the bells at the bottom of the sea were not
just a legend, but you could only hear them when you realised that the wind, the
seagulls and the sound of the palm fronds were all part of the pealing of the bells.
In just the same way, the warrior of light knows that everything around him -
his victories, his defeats, his enthusiasm and his despondency - form part of his Good
Fight. And he will know which strategy to use when he needs it. A warrior does not
try to be coherent; he has learned to live with his contradictions.'
'Who are you?' he asked.
But the woman was already moving off, walking over the waves towards the
rising moon.
142
